2.
OF ANCIENT MONUMENTS
OF THE
MALTA GROUP
NOTES
HISTORICAL
OF THE
PR. CESARE YASSALLO.
PHOENICIAN AND EGYPTIAN PERIOD.

Second revised and enlarged edition.
MALTA,
GOVERNMENT PRINTING SHOP.
1876.




A FEW WORDS OF WARNING.
The Phoenician and Egyptian monumental remains that I will mention in this booklet are certainly not all the existing ones, nor all the ones found in the Maltese Group: but if of Architecture, they are those that were either entirely or partially excavated; if of Sculpture and Plastic only those that are preserved in the Museum of this Public Library: the one therefore and the other visible to every person.
Many of the former still lie cluttered by their ruins in the surroundings of Gudia, Zabbar, Musta, Medina, and on the island of Gozo: and numerous latter are in private collections. Of those, one could only point to ruins that protrude from the surface; It is not worth talking about these, since they are hidden worse than they were in the lap of the earth from which they were dug up, and it is only with difficulty that they can sometimes be admired by the intelligent.




PHOENICIAN PERIOD.

The colonists of Tyrius. 
Henry, lib. I.

PHENICIA properly so called, having regard to the size of its territory, could be counted among the smallest states of antiquity, even during the times of its most flourishing condition: (1) inhabited, however, by an eminently commercial people, it had become among those of the first magnitude.
Its colonies were numerous, which governed themselves exclusively by themselves; and in this respect they were completely independent from their mother country, just as they were from each other. The only bond that tied them together were common commercial interests, civil customs, religious customs, the cult of their Gods, and above all of Melcarte, their great national and colonial divinity. (2)
From this naturally arose the indescribable care they took to introduce the cult of their gods wherever the love of traffic led them. In Memphis itself, they had built, not very far from the temple of Proteus, a chapel to Astarte, to whom they paid divine honours. (3)
Malta, which lies hidden among the waves, lies halfway between Sidon and Gadez (today Cadiz), offered a suitable storage place for the purples of Tyre, the perfumes of Arabia, and the silver of Spain: it also offered safe ports, friend refuge in the winter seasons, and a soil, if not of spontaneous abundance, certainly not ungrateful to the sweat of a diligent farmer. (4) These advantages were not unknown to the Phoenicians, and one of their colonies, leaving from Tire or Sidon, took peaceful possession of the island fourteen centuries and more before Christ. (5)
Having thus had a permanent seat in Malta, it seems that the Phoenicians had in mind to transform it into a great national Pantheon: there were so many sacred buildings that they erected there, so many divinities that they worshiped there.
But the concept of their temples, and the decorations that they sculpted in them, is almost identical in all of them: and this uniformity seems to arise from some pre-established religious law, which prohibited the architect from designing new plans and using different devices, since the building represent a symbolic expression, from which it was not permissible to depart.
Before going further, it is worth remembering how the religion of the Phoenicians was a mixture of pure Sabeism and idolatry in the strict sense.
Sabeism had its cradle among the peoples of Arabia, the great country of Phoenician trade. “The Arabs, Ezekiel Tiro was saying, and all the princes of Sheba and Raema trafficked with you, frequented your feasts with exquisite aromas, and with precious stones of every kind, and with gold. EZEK. 27, 19.” It is therefore not surprising that the Phoenicians, from so much contact with those of Arabia, and perhaps of the same origin, became astrolators. Therefore they built their temples under God, because the vivid ray of "he who lights up the whole world" and that of the silent moon, and of the smaller stars, would revive them, embellish them: and so that the Gods who had affixed to those celestial bodies, (6) could, without the interposition of an indiscreet once again, it would be better to welcome their gifts and listen to their wishes more easily.
The cult of the Stars had prescribed the rule to the geometric lines of these temples of theirs. The circular belt is therefore observable in everyone since the circle is the safest expression, the most apparently true image of every star.
Nor did this cult merely prescribe the rule to the architect: it directed the sculptor's chisel, the figulajo's wheel, and perhaps the painter's pencil. The Cabiric statuettes, which I will talk about later, have round limbs, circular bases, and circular external lines. The shape of the votive vases is round, and the decorations are circular. This is evidenced by the beautiful things preserved in this Museum, and by the many that have been reduced to pieces. Furthermore, the Sacred Slab is perforated throughout its surface, as it was supposed to represent myriads of stars.
I will now proceed to talk about the temples, according to the chronological order of their erection: judging this order not so much by the worst or best preservation of the same, but by the lesser or greater degree of perfection in the execution of the design.



(1) HEEREN, Historical researches, vol. 1.
(2) LORDS, loco citato.
(3) MIGNOT, 28th mem. on the Phoenicians.
(4) Cicero assures that the pirates of Cilicia, who in his time infested the Mediterranean, landed at the Maltese ports, and spent the long winters there in safe anchorage. CIC. in Verrem IV, 45, 47. And the same great Roman orator, attracted by the physical conditions of this island, more than once, in periods of civil disturbances, had the intention of retiring there in voluntary exile. CIC. ad Atticum III, 3, et X, 7, 8, 9.
(5) DIOD. SICULUS, 204, marg. lat. vers.
(6) VICO, Scienza nuova, lib. II.




ARCHITECTURE MONUMENTS.

Temple of Melcarte (1)

The temple of Melcarte stood on the hill overlooking Bir-zebbugia, at a distance of about 700 feet from the sea shore, to the north of the San Giorgio church. Those who came from other regions to vote could thus greet him from afar. Two portions of hemicycles, which a straight wall of about 33 feet unites and joins, is all that remains of them. The entire megalithic structure is made of irregular stones, superimposed on each other, and which derive their solidity from their size. The rest that many centuries have caused to fall clutters the internal area: so seen from a certain distance, it appears to you as a giant pile of stones, partly covered by the shadow of centuries-old carob trees, which perhaps have spread their roots up to at the sacred threshold. The current state of the temple does not allow much more to be said about it: but there are many accessories nearby, which increase the value in which this precious monument, already mentioned by Ptolemy and many others, should be kept.
Going up from the marina to the temple, three large monoliths appear halfway up, forming a sort of vestibule. The stone which serves as the architrave and roof, placed in a somewhat inclined position, (2) measures 15 feet 9 inches in length: of the two vertical ones, one is 11 feet 3 inches high, and the other 10 feet 7 inches. (3) I am led to believe that two surrounding walls joined from the temple to this sacred limit, beyond which no woman was allowed to penetrate. (4) This is true, the whole building would have had an axis of about 300 feet, and would justify Quintinus in some part, (5) who, having seen it three centuries ago, had given it dimensions which were believed to be exaggerated by Cluverius, who perhaps he had never seen it, much less measured it. This vestibule is now reduced by the land manager to a miserable shelter for animals.
The underlying shore is entirely pierced, almost at sea level, with circular pits, respectively from eight to two feet deep, wider at the base than at the mouth. They all feature vigorous fire action, having the surface calcined to a depth of 2 inches.
It is worthy of observation in this bank, the change in level, produced by slow and progressive sinking, in a period subsequent to the excavation of said pits, but very remote from us, so that no memory of it remained. Some of the sunken trenches are naturally half filled with sea water; and some rails are still being insensibly lost at sea.
Abela believed that these pits served as oil tanks, with which they filled the narrows of the nearby Zeitun district. (6) Ciantar reproduces the same judgment: (7) and my learned friend Professor Zerafa also did not hesitate to call them oil canoves. (8)
I will not follow the opinion of any of these historiographers; and I will briefly explain why.
First of all, I am not of the opinion that the Zeitun district, or any other district of the island, was ever so rich in olive groves as to extract so much oil, to fill it as if in storage, and then send it abroad. We often spoke of our apples, of our cotton cloths, of the white of our houses, of our dogs, and of our roses: but there were none of the ancients who admired the abundance of our oil, or who even mentioned it. But, it will be said, that the oil from the Zeitun could well be used for consumption on the island: but in this case, why transport it to Cala San Giorgio, expose it to the bad weather of the open sky, and to the humidity of the nearby marina? Was there perhaps a fortress missing in the Zeitun district, where there were digging, or oil wagons?
Furthermore; Either the oil was stored there before or after the sinking. Not before, since the worshipers of the god would not have allowed a load of oil within the inviolable limits of the temple, or if they had even allowed it, the owners would not have been foolish enough to put the oil in tubs or canove, which a wave from east or sirocco would have easily covered it: not afterwards, since it is not reasonable to suppose that there were Zeitunini so crazy as to preserve the oil in canoves or tubs already partly filled with sea ​​water.
But before saying what I think of these pits and other similar ones found in the valley under the temple; It seems necessary to remind me how all the Phoenician colonies had the obligation to light large fires every year, in a given season, in honor of their main deity.
Having now explained how and where these pits are dug and arranged; of the unusability of the object supposed by Abela and Zerafa, and finally of the indelible mark of the fiery action; it seems to me that we can assure ourselves with moral certainty that they were made for the use of furnaces, to contain the bonfires, which formed an integral part of the religious ritual of the worshipers of Melcarte.
Houël, misled by the reading of Abela and Ciantar, believed the temple of the Phoenician Hercules to be in Marsascirocco cove, properly so called, not very far from the church of Our Lady ad Nives (to the Snows). He also designed and published a wall 90 feet long, as the only and venerable remnant - although he confesses that he cannot understand what part of the temple such a long and isolated wall could have served. (9)
It seems strange to me, however, that Houël, who had observed so much, had not immediately recognized it as a building from a period much later than the Phoenician era: much more so since from Ciantar he would have been able to know (10) how part of the nearby floor was paved with local marble, and part composed of monochrome mosaic of Roman workmanship. Houël, who had seen the ruins of Bir-zebbugia, and affirmed that they were of very ancient construction and of the type of the Gozitan Giganteja (11) and therefore Phoenician; he should have come to the conclusion that that wall did not belong to the temple of Hercules Tyrio at all.
I will close with the words of Nidersted: (12) Hodie dicti templi (Herculis) monumenta admiratione dignissima adhuc supersunt, apud portum, quem Marsascirocco vocant, ad Ecclesiam ibi vicinam Sancto Georgio sacram. (To-day the monuments of the said temple (of Hercules) still remain, worthy of admiration, at the port, which they call Marsascirocco, to the church near there, sacred to St. George.)
It is already unnecessary to mention the error made by Abela himself, and Agius after him, (13) believing the statue of Hercules which is preserved in this Museum to have been transported from Phoenicia, and also believing it to be the simulacrum of the god adored by the Phoenicians . The Hercules in our Museum is that of Thebes, and not of Tyre; and it is of Greek chisel, even if one did not want to call it Roman. Arrogi that in the temples, raised in Melcarte, was no other simulacrum than the Flame.

Irrestincta focis servant altaria flammœ,
Sed nulla effigies, simulacrave nota Deorum
(The altars keep the flames unextinguished from the hearths,
But there are no portraits, simulacrums known to the Gods)
Sil. Ital. lib. III.




(1) This divinity was called Hercules Tyria by the Greeks, completely different from their Hercules, although the myths are often confused with it.
(2) Such monuments of primitive architecture can be seen in abundance in Great Britain; and it was those of Tire or Sidon who introduced the art and custom of erecting them. And the law of placing the stone that dominates at an angle is generally seen in everyone. GWILT, Encyclop. of Architecture.
(3) The largest of the blocks of Kitt's Cotty House in England is not more than 12 feet long, and that of the famous Lion's Gate in Mycenae only 11. 
(4) SILIUS ITALICUS, lib. III.
(5) Descriptio Melita.
(6) Della Descrittione di Malta, pag. 21.
(7) Malta Illustrata, pag. 100.
(8) Storia fisica di Malta, pag. 16.
(9) Voyage pittoresque, vol. IV, pag. 92.
(10) Malta Illustrata, vol. I, pag. 461,
(11) Voyage pittoresque, vol. IV, pag. 92.
(12) Malta Vetus et Nova, Helmstad 1669.
(13) In a dissertation. ms. which is kept in the library.



Temple of Juno.

Of the temple of Juno all we have left is the memory in the traditions handed down to us, and in the writings of the ancients: and I will mention it using what they said about it.
It stood on the promontory where the Sant'Angelo castle now towers, in whose ditch Quintino (1) had seen huge remains, which covered a large amount of land. It was near Cicero and very holy and very ancient, and the Goddess could be said to be proud of it, as well as that of her beloved Samos. (2) And if this temple could not boast, like that of Carthage, of its weapons and chariot; (3) however, it was very rich due to the gifts that were offered there. The large port that it dominated bore the name of the Goddess: the enemies who landed there especially in Punic battles, and the pirates, who took furtive shelter there in the winter seasons, always found it inviolable and sacred.
The captain of the army of Masinissa, having arrived in Malta, removed from this temple some elephant teeth of enormous size, which he sent as a present to his king. However, not long after, he learned how much of a sacred place he had taken from them; he sent them back on a quinquereme to their former place, with an inscription which meant in his language: "having ignorantly accepted them, and very willingly returned them." (4)
But as the years passed, the greedy Verres, despiser of men and Gods, unlike King Numida, whom the Romans called barbarian, sent his venereal servants there, who stripped the temple of its riches, and of the ivory works, representing victories, executed with marvelous art. The Maltese ambassadors complained vehemently about it before the senate, and Tullius repeated their just complaints before the judges. (5)
It is easy to infer that the temple of Juno remained intact until the late Roman domination, and that the Romans themselves continued to venerate it, worshiping the Goddess for whose cult it had been built by the Phoenicians.
The late Professor Zerafa (6) believed that the granite column, which is found in the chapel of the Sant'Angelo castle, had belonged to the temple of Juno. But in addition to the fact that he did not indicate any reason on which he based his belief: we are unable to know what use the shaft of a single granite column could have been used for, in a temple sub dio, in a temple which we have reason to believe was built using our own stone: remembering that Quintinus, in speaking about it, made no mention of marble, and remembering that our stone exclusively provided the material for the construction of the other temples. Unless we want to assume that it was a votive column, like the two candelabra of the temple of Melcarte, and that perhaps it did not deserve the attention of Verres' henchmen.



(1) Loco citato.
(2) In Verrem, IV, et V.
(3) Æneidos, lib. I.
(4) Val. Max. lib. I, c. II.
(5) Loco citato.
(6) Storia Artistica di Malta.




Temple of Astarte in Gozo.

This temple is better known under the name of "Tower of the Giants," and this was given to it, who knows how many centuries ago, for its circular shapes, and for the enormous boulders that surround it. It is already common practice among the Maltese to call it "tower" any circular building, the object of which is not known: this is how the temple of Bir-zebbugia, Torri-giauhar (tower of the pearls) is called Torri-ta-Lhud (tower of the Jews) a beautiful sepulchral monument not far from Gudia, and Torri-tal-ghassieui (guardian's tower) the rest of an ancient construction in the district of the same village.
General Alberto della Marmora in a letter to Mr. Raoul Rochette, published in the Annales nouvelles de l'Institution archeologique, already spoke very extensively about this temple built to Astarte, the Phoenician Venus: and Mr. Mazzara had published some views of it before him and a plant, calling it the “Antediluvian Temple of the Giants.” And although the opinion is extremely pompous, it does not fail to meet with the approval of many, who do not find valuable a monument that has not remained under flood waters for 150 days, and which in addition has not been erected by people, which at least wasn't twenty feet tall.



Hhagiar Kim Temple.


Hhagiar Kim (Worship Stones) is a place about a mile south of Krendi village. Already in ancient times the colossal boulders that stand there had aroused admiration and curiosity in all those who had visited them: and it was a common desire that, once upon a time, work would be done to clear the space that those boulders surrounded from the stones that cluttered it; being sure that anything interesting for archaeological science in general, and more particularly for the civil and religious history of the Maltese Group, would without fail be revealed. Consequently, in November 1839, Sir H. F. Bouverie authorized Sir V. Casolani, collector of territorial revenues, to undertake the excavation, which lasted two months and the Phoenician temple of Hhagiar Kim was discovered as it now stands.
It was certainly inadvertence to have placed Mr. Vance in charge of the excavation, who does not appear to have had sufficient foresight and sufficient knowledge to direct such an interesting undertaking. I will certainly not say what much he should have done and did not do, but I will not hesitate to accuse him of negligence, in not having given a public account of the daily operations, and of every object found there, and above all of the precise place where everything was found. Every lover of science would be happy to do so, and we wouldn't have to beg now for information and news from the people employed at the time to dig, generally idiots, and on the faith of whose words it is better to stand, most of the time against one's own conviction. But let this stream be closed.
Having taken a look at the plan of the temple, you are presented with two parallel spaces, with an oblong circular shape, compressed, and of unequal extension. The largest runs at 105 (English) feet, the other at 80. At the first space two others join, almost of the same size, but only 38 feet long each.
The surrounding wall is built of colossal stones, mostly placed vertically; as so are the walls of internal divisions.
There are various approaches: but there is no question that the main one was the one looking at the eastern regions.
Having taken into account the hemicycles, divided from the rest with special stones, and the two spaces that join the larger area; it is clear that the concept was to make seven main divisions.
A few steps from the wall, four slabs can be observed which rise to 14 and 15 feet respectively, and which, joined at the lower end, cover a line of 27 feet: and two others of almost the same size, and a seventh block.
In one of the main spaces you can see an interestingly shaped altar. It is a quadrangle, 2 feet 5 inches high, and a foot and a half wide on each side. Eight small pillars protrude from the corners, supporting an abacus: and on the interposed facades two portions of snakes are represented in high relief, joined at one point, from which a palm tree begins, which covers and adorns the entire surface with its branches. On the abacus it stands four inches high, a circle a foot or more in diameter. All the surfaces of the pillars are perforated in every direction.
Near the described altar is the sacred slab, set between two parallel and vertical stones. The same is usually perforated throughout the surface; and in the middle of two raised spiral lines, half of the egg can be seen in high relief. The sacred slab rests along its entire length on a dais, which is certainly the sacred threshold. (1) In the space between the two aforementioned large stones, large quantities of quadruped bones were found; and it is believed that, by digging further, the ossuary pit would be found.
Furthermore, many pieces of vases of various sizes were excavated: some decorated with tiles, others with circles; part chiselled, part relief; all in terracotta: and three monopods of a single stone, still intact, and the same ruins under which they lay for so many centuries have preserved them.
In some parts of the temple, which no one is able to indicate, many concave-convex stones were found; others conical in shape, others hemispherical, which when paired and united, would form either a sphere or an egg.
Their respective sizes vary, i.e. from 5 inches to 3½ inches in diameter.
But the most precious object among the finds are certainly seven statuettes of local stone, various in size, with severed heads and perhaps the only ones of Phoenician art that have come down to us. Two sit, and a large skirt surrounds and covers them, distinctive of their feminine sex: and one of the two has a braid of hair running down her back to her heels. Four are crouched down and completely naked. A seventh, which is the largest, is mutilated from the knees down, and an area covers it from the navel to mid-thigh. In all of them we must observe an obesity that makes them bizarrely similar, and that, in spite of yourself, makes you laugh. In two, where the neck joins the torso, there is a concavity, and some practicable holes, to fit into, and secure a false head. The bases, either formed by the edges of the respective skirts, or by the crouched limbs, are circular, and measure from 1 foot 8 inches to 3 feet at the periphery: the heights vary from 7 to 9 inches. The largest of the figurines would fit perfectly in a circle of just over four feet. And it should be noted that when observed from the front, they represent an external line composed of two semicircles of unequal diameter, the smaller one superimposed on the larger one: and there appears a dominant thought of making the circular lines stand out in every part and in every member of them.
The whole of this temple has thus been briefly described, and the most noteworthy accessories that were found there; I will proceed to freely say what I feel, hoping that if my words are not worth persuading the wise and erudite, they will at least serve to push them to have their say, with greater certainty of better success. Which if it happens, will certainly bring me no small glory.
Astrolaters such as the Phoenicians represented the stars, as I have already said, in constant circular figures: and their Cosmogony leading them to the cult of the Universe, and to the procreative Power; they symbolized the first under the aspect of the Egg, which if divided in two represented the sky and the earth; and the other with more modesty than the Etruscans and Romans, under that of one or two paired serpents, or two spiral lines.
But a nation established on the coasts of a navy more than 150 miles long, and which had drawn its splendor and riches from navigation and commerce, must have remained grateful to those who had built the first ship, marked the first furrow in the sea, and were so expert in astronomical science: and for this the Cabiri well deserved the honor of the Apotheosis from the Phoenicians.
There were seven of them, (2) all sons of Sidek, who in our language would sound like "Your Lord." An eighth was added to them, called Esmun, or Aesculapius, venerated with a special cult, and to whom temples were particularly built. Of the Cabiri two were females Axieros (Ceres) and Axiokersa (Proserpina). (3)
The Cabiri had also written the theology revealed by Tot to the Phoenicians: they had discovered the use of simples, the way of healing from poisonous bites, and the art of enchantments, that is, of restoring health, by murmuring mysterious words. Then they were given the name Kbir, which Varro and Tertullian interpret as Potens. And in the Maltese language, isn't Kbir the same as saying Great, Mighty?
The cult of the Cabiri is still shrouded in mysterious darkness, as only priests were allowed to enter their sanctuaries. Cabirorum fanum solis sacerdotibus permissum. (Only the priests were allowed to fan the cabirs.) Herod, lib. III. And the very simulacra of this divinity had something mysterious about them, with a ridiculous shape and appearance, and reddish to the Volcano of Memphis, which, when seen by Cambyses, excited him to excessive laughter. Cabirorum simulachra erant Vulcani simulachris similia: forma nimirum et species utriusque ridicula ..... Cambises Memphiticum Vulcani templum ingressus, statuam ejus excepit multo risu (The simulacrums of the Cabiris were similar to those of the Vulcans: the shape and appearance of both were, of course, ridiculous .....Cambyses entered the Memphite temple of Vulcan, and received his statue with much laughter)
HEROD at Bochart. col. 396
Once the Cabiri were deified, it came to pass that temples should be given to them. And the Phoenicians actually built several of them, among which I will remember that of Berytus, as famous as the temple of Neptune. (4) It is not to say that even in Esmun they were particularly erected: and one was admired in the noblest part, that is, in the middle of Carthage. (5)
It was appropriate that the Phoenician-Maltese colony, persuaded of the same beliefs, and induced by the same interests, followed the example of the others. But it is not the only reason of convenience that leads us to believe so. There is, apparently, such positive evidence that there is no doubt at all that the Phoenicians did not build a temple to the Seven Cabiri Brothers, and that such a temple is not this one of Hhagiar Kim.
Seven, as I have already said, are the main divisions of the temple, and seven are the large stones that rise before reaching the walls: a symbol of the power and number of the divinities worshiped there.
The same district where this temple stands is called Rahal Kbir, a village that could not be called either large or powerful par excellence. In fact, Duzzina only barely mentions it, (6) and Abela assures that it did not contain more than twenty-one fires.
But what will be said about the analogy and perfect resemblance between the seven figures described and those mentioned by Herodotus? It seems that the father of history wanted to adapt the phrase "forma et species utriusque ridicula" (the form and appearance of both are ridiculous) to ours. And I can assure you that when you see them for the first time they have made more than one Cambyse laugh, perhaps the least likely to laugh: they are so squat and dwarf.
Argue that two of them are women, and they will certainly want to be Ceres and Proserpina, the Cabire sisters. The area, which surrounds the largest of the seven, perhaps wants to symbolize the Zodiac, as a sign of the supreme Cabiric expertise in the science of the stars. 
It aroused curiosity how these figurines had been found headless, and how two of them, apparently, had had a false head.
I will be the first to observe that more ancient statues reached us broken and without any limbs than whole ones: the most celebrated museums attest to this. In this Group of Malta the beautiful discovery in Gozo, and now preserved in the Museum of the Public Library; the Roman one posted under the Medina gate; and the statue of the Theban Hercules, the head is cut off: and if that of Hercules has it, it was placed on it by the chisel of Casha.
The reasons for such mutilations are so obvious that there is no point in repeating them. Add that of hatred and religious aversion. Once the Christians emerged from the catacombs, and were free from the constant persecutions, which they willingly faced, as a testimony of their faith, they too will perhaps have broken some heads and cut off some noses of some of the innumerable multitude of Gods, who had eyes and they had no sight, no ears and no hearing.
The use of false heads seems to have been common among the ancients, who may have borrowed it from the Phoenicians. Suetonius (7) says that instead of breaking the statues of the Caesars, of hateful memory, they removed their heads, which they replaced with others of beloved and dear Caesars. In the year 1761, on the hills of Piacenza in Velleja, well-preserved and healthy imperial statuettes were discovered, which had false heads, which could be removed and put back on the trunk as and when they wanted. Each head ended in a cone, which fit into a recess made in the neck of the statuette. (8)
But none of the heads of our Cabiric figures were found. And I am of the opinion that either, being made of more fragile material than stone, they will not have resisted the impact of the boulders that fell on them, or being made of more precious material they will have aroused the greed of those who little believed in the power of the divinities they represented; and that this unbeliever will have taken possession of it without any scruple whatsoever.
The altar, described above, suggests that it was for sacrifices to Hecate. Let us remember that in the cave sacred to the Cabiri in Samothrace, dogs were sacrificed to this Goddess, since the barking of dogs, according to Sophro, scares away the ghosts. (9) And perhaps the cells formed of three monoliths, which can be seen in some parts of the temple, perhaps served to keep the dogs to be sacrificed. The palm tree with which this altar is decorated revives our memory of the religious importance that the Phoenicians attributed to the palm branch. They held it as a mark of high respect: and they covered their faces with a palm branch when they addressed their vows and prayers to their Gods. (10)
The monopods were probably used to deposit the vases on them, the debris of which was found cluttering up a large piece of land, and which were perhaps of some necessity in the mysterious initiations of the Coes.
It is not worth mentioning the human skull unearthed in the excavations of this temple, and which is currently preserved in the Library Museum. Much has been said about its monstrosity and its antiquity. In the midst of this controversy, it is permissible for me to reproduce some observations that my learned friend Professor Galland has already published on this subject. (11)
“This Skull is evidently an adult, and rather a male, aged 30 to 40 years. It is very interesting, whether we want to consider it as a mere accidental monstrosity, or whether we want to consider it as an indication of a race, variety of race, or individuals with such characteristics, in some remote time. In fact, it presents a more acute facial angle (12) than what has so far been found (if we are not greatly mistaken) in the human species.”
In another place, this is how Dr. Galland responds to those who ask him the era attributable to the skull. “Certainly a very interesting question, which cannot be answered at the moment, since it is very difficult, although not impossible, to determine the time in which bones can last. A thousand elements contribute: the age of the individual, the way in which he is buried, the nature of the soil, and other circumstances can vary the duration of maintenance of the bones."
However, it seems that the learned professor is of the opinion that if the director of the excavation had taken and given an account of the way in which the skeleton was lying, where it looked, if wrapped, and in which if in short Mr. Vance had taken into account all the operations in an excavation of such importance; perhaps it would have been possible to come to some conclusions in relation to the era relating to this skull.
Having repaid what they owed to the Seven Cabiri, all that remained was for the Phoenicians to dedicate a temple to the special cult of Esmun, the eighth brother: and they still fulfilled this other duty by raising the


Dolla Mnaidra temple


which is about a mile from that of the brothers; so that the two are within sight of each other and as if they were mutually protecting each other. By building two temples to members of the same deified lineage so close together, the Phoenicians showed how much respect they held for family relationships and how much importance they had for them.
This temple is certainly the best preserved of all, and is also the most elegant, so that it seems to have been built when the art of building was in its greatest perfection among the Phoenicians. It remained unnoticed, because it was distant from the consortium of men, and therefore safer from their devastation, until the time of the excavation of Hhagiar Kim: when seeing the giant slabs rising from the midst of the accumulated rubble, one thought whether perhaps they were not of some temple walls. Then in May 1840 the excavation work was undertaken under the direction of Mr. Vance himself, and this very interesting monument rose to greet the sun again.
As with that of Astarte in Gozo, this one could be said to be two contiguous temples, and not communicating. In fact, the plan offers you to see two distinct areas, each composed of two elongated, parallel circles of unequal dimensions, and accessible due to a large opening in the wall that distinguishes and separates them. The smaller area, which however seems to have been the temple itself, has a magnificent and gigantic entrance, which seems like yesterday's work and which faces the sirocco. The apparatus is megalithic like that of the other temples.
To the right of this entrance, some repositories or, we would say, low chambers can be seen, which there is every reason to believe were built to house the dogs, which had to guard the temple, a custom religiously observed in all the temples of Esculapió. (13)
The larger area has the opening, through which to enter, narrow rather than: and in front of it the south winds. Knowing how much trust the Phoenicians placed in the healing power of this divinity, and how numerous they led their sick to his temple, where there was an assigned place for them; It will perhaps not be out of place to suppose that they used this space as a hospital, covering it where appropriate with a parapetasma to protect the poor sick people who were taken there for treatment from the sun and rain that could occur.
And here it falls to me to observe that if this temple and that of Hhagiar Kim were to become virgin of the much stone that still encumbers them, and the way to the underground passages that intelligent and learned people of the place ascertain to exist there were attempted; we could perhaps arrive at the discovery of some monumental object, which would lead us to some historical truth, which until now has remained in darkness and mystery.
I will not end the description of the religious buildings of the Phoenicians without mentioning the one which stands unnoticed on the hill of Corradino. Only a small portion was excavated in 1840, and only about five feet deep, and two entrances were soon discovered, leading to the usual hemicycles, and of the same apparatus of very large stones. There is no doubt that by cleaning up that surrounding area, marked on the surface by huge boulders, which invite digging, one would not discover, even in Corradino, an entire building, not perhaps inferior in interest to the others excavated so far.




(1) The Altar and the sacred slab are now in the Museum of the Public Library.
(2) EUSEBII Præp. Evang. lib. I, cap. I.
(3) BOCHARTI Geogr. Sacra, col. 394.
(4) EUSEBII, ibidem.
(5) STRAB. XVIII.
(6) Acta visitationis, 1574.
(7) Vitæ XII Cæs.
(8) Dell'Architettura Egiziana, Dissertazione, Parma, Bodoni, 1786.
(9) BOCHART, loco citato, pag. 397.
(10) Hist. de l'Acad. des Inscriptions, vol. 34, pag. 90.
(11) Il Portafoglio Maltese, Nri. 81 e 82.
(12) It measures no more than 62 degrees, or rather 60 to 61.
(13) Hist. de l'Acad. des Inscriptions, vol. 36, p. 81.





Other Constructions.

The water reservoir in the Medeuiet district is certainly an interesting monument; yes because of its proximity to the temple of Melcarte, so it seems to have been of some necessity in the religious ritual of those people; yes again due to its very structure.
It is parallelepiped in shape, with a square base measuring 33 feet on each side, and visibly 13 feet high. I say visibly, since it is so cluttered with stones that without much trouble and expense in cleaning it up, its height could not be ascertained.
It is divided by twelve sturdy pillars, isolated, without capitals of any kind, and arranged in three rows. Only two boulders 8 feet 8 inches thick form some of the said pillars: all the others three. No tenacious matter or lime binds these boulders: but the surfaces that fit together are smoothed out in such a way that there is not one that hangs on one side, and the joints run very straight. Some pieces of bitumen are still so adherent to the walls that it is with great difficulty that any fragments can be removed from them. Five large stones extend along each of the rows and form an imposing architrave. Enormous slabs of considerable thickness rest on one side of these architraves, and the other inside the opposite wall, and present a flat roof, the only one known to be practicable among the Phoenicians.
The structure of the Reservoir, and the huge stones have made it called "Ghar-el-giganti" (giants' cave), and "Gigantja" (giants' district) also called the esplanade that is superimposed on it, due to the large boulders, other polygons, other squares etc. that are observed there. And in those surroundings, those who looked after the temple must have lived either in caves now closed, or in buildings now ruined, and who were anxious to have such a quantity of water, perhaps for its service.
I will mention here the section of the wall of Mesrahh Ghonok in Hhal-Dmiehh in the vicinity of the Musta, designed and illustrated by Mr. Grognet, a very talented architect and ingenious archaeologist: who, unmoved by his pre-established theory, wanted it to be Atlantic, and the work of giants. For me I go further down, and I am happy to have it for the construction of men of ordinary dimensions, of those precisely who knew how, and were able to lift and superimpose one on top of the other, the immense stones of Hhagiar Kim, and of the Mnaidra.
Speaking of Phoenician walls, I will not ignore the one built in 1834 by Mr. Frere in his delightful Villa of Pietà: and it was built not so much to serve as a base for a magnificent avenue and a verdant parterre, but rather to put under view and almost in one point, the slender forms of Greek architecture, and the heavy, but not perishable, of Phoenician. Having seen this wall one cannot help but remember the temple of Mnaidra.




Hypogea.


The Phoenicians were no less compassionate towards the Gods towards their dead. Not used to burning or burying corpses, they took care to place them in cells cut into the stone, arranged inside purposely dug caves, and outside the city. (1) Their country abounds in such burial grounds; and three hours away from Sidon is the famous perforated fortress.
Among the many hypogea that have been excavated in Malta, that of Ben-Gemma (son of the scalp) deserves to be included first.
Ben-Gemma mountain stands in a delightful part of the island, an hour's walk west of the Medina. The valleys it dominates are proud of their lush orange groves and pomegranate trees: and the waters that flow abundantly make the local inhabitants greengrocers. The crest of the mountain, cut horizontally, offers a vast plain, from which you can enjoy one of the most beautiful villages on the island. The side, which faces the binnacle of Our Lady of the Letter, is irregularly pierced with caves, which amount to better than sixty: and most of them are easy to access, and of a finiteness and perfection in concept and execution, which surpasses all expectations.
The internal structure varies in many: some simpler, others being more subdivided. But in general a large antechamber extends into a narrow corridor, flanked by aedicules to contain a corpse, other bisomes, other trisomes; chiseled in the manner of funeral beds, at the opposite ends of which two projections are seen, one to rest the head in a hollow, the other the feet. The same shapes are preserved in beds for children and adolescents.
All the aedicules, as appears, were well closed by a slab, which fit into a hollow made on purpose around each opening of the same. 
Semi-circular chambers can be observed in this beautiful necropolis, repeated in various caves, which lead one to believe that they were intended for some religious ceremony.
There were those who judged (2) that these caves served as a dwelling for the Essenes, a famous sect among the Jews, which arose around the time of Our Lord, who kept themselves away from populous cities, inhabiting villages, and who occupied themselves with agriculture and innocent professions. (3) And this judgment was perhaps made because these caves were, and still are called by those good villagers Ghirien-el-Lhud" (caves of the Jews). But it must be remembered that among our peasants for "Lhud" there are all non-believers, and those whose belief is unknown. Thus they called and still call "Torri-ta-Lhud" (tower of the Jews) the temple of Melcarte in Bir-zebbugia, because he was elevated to a false God by non-believers.
How much the caves of Ben-Gemma are worth of housing, especially the internal cavities, is indicated by their structure. At most, they could have served as a temporary shelter in times of persecution, as were our catacombs, of which Milizia says that "made for the dead, they served to save the living with their most precious possessions." (4)
Two years ago (in 1874), the fortress being built on the said hill was in progress, Messrs. Lewis and Fielden discovered, in one of its sides, various crypts containing mortuary cells, excavated on the same type as those described.
Another interesting Hypogeum, which, as far as I know, no one has mentioned so far, is found in the garden so called "Tal Calcara," in the valley below Selmun, on the road that leads to the Melleha, and meets the same palace.
You enter through a beautiful door, built in 1766, decorated with the arms of Pinto, and those of two Balis, perhaps the Commissioners of the Mount of Redemption for that year. Having crossed the garden, full of proud vegetation, you reach on the left a climb, if not dangerous, certainly not very comfortable, which leads to a spacious cave, 40 steps in length, varying its width from 15 to 80 steps. A natural wall divides it, and these two divisions are made by two foramina. In the smaller one, a cubicle of the shape of those of Ben-Gemma can be seen, cut into the rock, and into which the body was introduced through a hole, in the manner of an oven mouth: and the usual rise for placing the head can still be seen. Many traces of such cubicles can be observed in the two divisions, which are well lit both by the entrance to the cave and by the openings that lead to the garden below.
With great difficulty, and not without danger, you reach the other cave, which is to the right of those who enter the garden. It is divided into two: the upper one and the lower one. Once entered, it is immediately known to be a work of art, and nothing in it attracts particular attention. Not so in the upper room, where you go up a ladder, cut into the wall, and half already ruined. It is much larger than the lower one; and it is all pierced with cubicles of the usual shape and proportions. A window through the large wall, which overlooks the garden, introduces light, so it is always well lit.
Passing in silence the many and numerous hypogea of ​​Melleha and Benghisa, it is worth mentioning the one in the "Tal Ghzira" district. It is no further than 200 steps from the bridge that connects the Manoel fort to the mainland, and a stone's throw from the villa of the knight Giacomo Tagliaferro. It is entered through a small door, which appears to be Greek, about 3 feet high, and which a plaque closed, and perhaps concealed. echelon you find yourself in a short corridor, which on the left widens into a semicircular chamber, in the wall of which a dead cell is hollowed out: to the right of the corridor, and in front of the chamber, there are two containers of unequal size. The largest one, which will certainly have preserved the lord's corpse, is decorated inside with tiles, a form of ornamental sculpture widely adopted by the Phoenicians.
I will not remain silent about the other burial ground of Ghar-Gherduf, on the island of Gozo, in the district of San Giorgio, about a mile and a half away from Rabato. It is now vandalized, and worse, reduced to a Latomia; so that very few of the bedrooms and storage rooms remained, and before long these too will disappear due to the repeated blows of the digger.
I will end by saying that if one wanted to actually try to trace Phoenician hypogea, Roman catacombs, dormitories and Christian crypts, a very interesting "Underground Malta" would have to be written and to this end it would be inevitable that no one worthy would be found who wanted to equal the glory of the Maltese Bosio.



(1) Hist. de l'Acad. des Inscriptions, vol. 42, pag. 55, 87.
(2) CIANTAR, vol. I, pag. 240.
(3) BERGIER, Diction. Encyclop. de theologie.
(4) Diz. alla parola Catacombe.






MONUMENTS OF SCULPTURE AND PLASTIC.


1. Among the remaining monuments of Phoenician sculpture, the Cabiric statuettes, which have already been spoken of, undoubtedly occupy the first place. Next to them come the two Cippi, or we will say like the others, Candelabra, of salt marble, 3 feet and two inches tall, including the pedestal, and broken at the top.
There is no one who can ascertain when they were found: but Ciantar truly made a mistake in saying that they were unearthed in 1732, since Can had already spoken about them in detail. Costanzo in December 1694, in a letter to the Bulifon, reported in the "Lettere memorabili" of 1697.
The value of these two votive cippi lies not so much in the work of the chisel, although of quick forms and gentle execution, but in the inscription that can be read engraved on the pedestal, together with the Greek one, and which enjoys the pride of being the masterpiece, even known here, of the Phoenician epigraphy: to interpret which Barthelemy, Swinton, Perez Bayer, Fabricius, and the very erudite Gesenius sweated and worked.
Of the various interpretations published by these orientalists, let me transcribe that of Gesenius, reported in his interesting work “Monumenta Phoenicia.”
DOMINO NOSTRO MELCARTO, DOMINO TYRI. VIR VOVENS (est) SERVUS TUUS (i. e. sum ego) ABD-OSIR CUM FRATRE MEO OSIRSCHAMAR AMBO FILII OSIRSCHAMARI, FILII ABDOSIRI. UBI AUDIVERIT VOCEM EORUM, BENEDICAT IIS.
(OUR LORD MELCARTO, LORD OF TYRE. A VOWING MAN (is) YOUR SERVANT (i. e. I am) ABD-OSIR WITH MY BROTHER OSIRSCHAMAR BOTH THE SON OF OSIRSCHAMAR, THE SON OF ABDOSIR. Wherever he heard their voice, he blessed them.)

The Greek inscription is thus interpreted.
DIONYSIUS (ABD-OSIR) ET SERAPION (OSIRCHAMAR) SERAPIONIS (OSIRSCHAMAR) FILII TYRII, HERCULI (MELCARTO) CONDUCTORI.
(DIONYSIUS (ABD-OSIR) AND SERAPION (OSIRCHAMAR) OF SERAPION (OSIRSCHAMAR) THE SON OF TYRIUS, THE CONDUCTORS OF HERCULES (MELCARTUS).)

Grand Master Rohan (would you believe?) discarded these memorial stones by sending one to the King of France in 1780, which Monsignor Brest saw in 1797 in the library of the Mazarin College. Thus, thanks to the generosity of the most provident prince, only one remained, which is preserved in the Museum of this Library.
2. A figurine pasta mask, smaller than life, but very well modeled and with an interesting shape. Those who believe it to represent Esmun, with his long beard and adorned with the usual headbands in the guise of a graceful necklace, do not stray from the truth.
3. A small figurine vase, unearthed in 1757. It is undoubtedly an Epichysin of beautiful shapes, excellent workmanship and very well preserved. The holes surrounding the edges seem to have served some religious use. Castelli (1) in the copper, which he published, bears a Phoenician legend, inscribed on the maximum swelling of the vase; which however I have never been able to track down.
4. A terra cotta bath found by chance near the Medina in 1797. It is worked in raised bands on a flat background, all very well polished, and of a light reddish colour. It is no more than 5½ feet long over a height of 2 feet 7 inches, and measures one foot four inches wide. Three slabs of the same material serve as a lid.
The bottom, or lower surface, is worthy of observation, as it has a conical-shaped hollow in each of the internal corners, ending within the depth of the corresponding foot. Assuming that this Bath was used for extreme ablutions, it is easy to infer that these recesses, or containers, could have been used to place natrone and aromatic herbs in solution with water.
To those who want a sarcophagus in preference, not finding it large enough to have it as a bathroom, I will say in brief that the same difficulty lies on their part. Since if 5½ feet long etc. they are not enough for a bath, they are certainly not enough for a sarcophagus.
It is not to say that the edges are all dotted with small holes, and these practicable holes are nothing more than a very simple symbolic ornament.
5. Anyone wishing to know how knowledgeable the Phoenicians were in veterinary art should observe the beautiful Amphora, which is preserved in this Museum. It was found in the ditch of the Sant' Angelo castle, near the place where the temple of Juno stood, rich in gifts and votes that so powerfully tempted that good Verres wool. It measures a foot and a half in height, and the maximum swelling is two feet and an inch. It is still in excellent condition, except for one of the handles which is broken in some part: and the luster and color of the silver patina that many centuries have given it almost makes you doubt whether it is not truly an elegant silver vase, released just from the hands of the craftsman.




(1) Sicilia Veteres Inscriptiones, pag. 298.



PHENICIAN MONETARY.


Of the Phoenician-Maltese coins, only five bronze ones have reached us, with the well-known legend of three letters in four of them, the fifth being anepigraph.
1. Veiled female head, with diadem. Reverse: A deity ending in herms, courted by two priestesses. The one preserved in the Library Museum is recusa, and has a small senile head, also bearded and veiled.
2. Veiled female head, with diadem. A: Ram's Head.
3. The same female leader. A: A Tripod with three crowns.
4. Head of a bearded man, looking at a caduceus. A: An object resembling a pomegranate within a laurel wreath, which fruit many believed to be a bell. I am tempted to believe that the head of a man represents Esmun (Aesculapius) looking at two snakes. And this reptile always goes in the company of the God who restores health.
5. Veiled female head. A: A crab. This coin is devoid of legend at all.
Monsignor Brest spoke at length about these five coins: and whoever has the desire to be better educated about them should read what the learned prelate wrote about them.



EGYPTIAN PERIOD.


The coming of the Phoenicians to Malta is attested by history, which is silent about that of the Egyptians. So two questions could arise: If the Egyptians really came there, and when.
I will respond to the first by describing monuments recognized as Egyptian by Münter, Della Marmora, Orioli, Lepsius, and by many of those who know, who judged them after having seen and examined them. Such monuments were all found at random, at various times, and in different places of the Maltese Group: and among them there are immovable ones, and non-transportable ones, except with certainty of breaking. And if monumental proofs are the surest for establishing a historical truth; I couldn't find more suitable ways to decide on the arrival of the Egyptians in these islands.
It remains to be seen when they probably arrived to settle there. First, they may have come together with the Phoenician colony, as Vossius opines to have happened in Spain. "Fortasse classis ea, quae in Hispanias, coloniam duxit, non modo Phoenicibus, sed etiam Aegyptiis constabat" (Perhaps the fleet which led the colony to Spain consisted not only of the Phoenicians, but also of the Egyptians): (1) and that in the course of time there occurred a fusion of Egyptian customs and uses with those of the Phoenicians, who by their number and relationships had exclusively acquired the domination of these islands, and even obliterated the name of the Egyptians. Secondly, Psammetichus could have come to dominate, greedy for riches, he opened the ports of his kingdom to all peoples, and stimulated his subjects to traffic and trade.
The Egyptians were not new to the art of trading; since according to what Huezio says (2) they always enjoyed the fame of having found in the world the traffic in person of Osiris and Mercury. So they willingly seconded the impulse given to them by the sovereign.
They were also highly skilled helmsmen. Euripides (in Troas) assures us that the Greeks naively confess that they learned the art of navigation.
Where better could good traffickers and excellent sailors go and establish establishments than in Malta?
This could have happened 650 years before the coming of Our Lord: when the Greeks mastered the island, and could draw many advantages from the coming of the Egyptians.
I will not dwell too much on this matter, and I will let everyone choose the opinion that suits him best, and which he believes to be the most probable, or least uncertain.




(1) De origine et progressu Idolatriae, libro I, cap. 24. 
(2) Hist. du commerce des Anciens.




ARCHITECTURE MONUMENT.

Of great interest is the Underground dug into a solid rock, and discovered in 1847, by Messrs. Winthrop and Lock.
It is 3 quarters of a mile S.E. from the Medina, in the district of Kasam-el-geuieni. Three rooms make it up, communicating with each other through passages created within the intervening walls. The one on the left, looking from the outside, is the largest, and is 35 feet long and 15 wide: the other two do not run more than 18, over a width varying from 15 to 16 feet. Each of the three bedrooms has a communication opening to the outside. The roof is parallel to the ground: all the lines are generally straight, or break to form angles: and all the shapes are squat, and pygmy. Remains of ornaments can still be seen, although with some difficulty, carved on some of the walls, and the traces of an animal, which would appear to be an Ibi.
Note some seats protruding from the wall; and a small square pool, 10 feet on each side, 2 feet deep, dug on purpose to contain water, of which there is never a shortage, and supplied perhaps by some friendly spring nearby.
This excavation is under the edge of the hill, in a steep place and difficult to access. The most practicable entrance is that of the room on the left: the other two are almost impervious, and are hidden behind some large stones.
The internal space is thus diminished and cluttered by those large intervening walls; the difficulty of getting there; the care to hide the entrances from others, arranged in such a way as to make surprise difficult, but when surprised facilitate escape; the seats, which we would better call beds protruding from the walls; and finally the great concern to be provided with water; are some of the reasons, which make me consider the excavation of Kasam-el-geuieni as a “place of refuge.”
The Reverend Margoliuth, induced to visit it by the references that were published in the London Literary Gazette of 2 October 1847, visited it, examined it, spoke about it at length, and finally drew the conclusion that it was a "place of worship" of the primitive Egyptian or Phoenician inhabitants of the island. (1)
But if the learned gentleman had paid attention to the pre-established forms of the religious architecture of the Phoenicians, which abhor rectilinearity and the severity of rectangles in the general assembly; there would have been no room for doubt in deciding between them and the Egyptians.
The Phoenicians also built and not excavated temples to their gods. The fortresses of Phoenicia, and the hill of Ben-gemma, and other places still are full of their hypogea: but their Hypetrian temples rose towering in Tyre, in Gadez, in Malta, and in the sister island.


(1) A Pilgrimage to the land of my fathers: by Margoliuth, vol. I, pag. 179 et seq.




MONUMENTS OF SCULPTURE AND PLASTIC &c.

existing in the Public Library Museum.

The group representing the Egyptian Triad, brought by a Thalamifera, was found by chance in Gozo in a solitary place, amidst rubble collected there from time immemorial. It is wrought of home-grown stone and rises one foot two inches, upon a pedestal one-half inch high.
Osiris sits, as if on a chair, in human limbs, with the head of Ibi, and having the mysterious Tau breathed in his left hand. He has a narrow recess on his head, where the usual miter could safely be fitted. Next to him sits Isis in feminine guise, wearing a cap, the two edges of which cover her breasts on both sides. She is dressed in a tight bundle, which reaches down to her heels: and the small hollow on the top of her head indicates that she once did not lack the lotus flower among her ordinary clothing. Oro, the little boy, is in the middle, with the large disc on his falcon head.
The thalamifera that supports the chair stands upright, covered from the waist down with a light skirt, and adorned with curly hair on the head, not dissimilar to that of the Egyptian female, which Montfaucon published in Copper 140, No. 9.
The sides of the pedestal, and those of the strip that underlies the chair, and the dais are also rich in hieroglyphics: as is a strip, in the form of a ribbon, which starts from the back of the priestess's neck, and ends up lost in the pedestal: mysterious figures can be seen engraved on her shoulder bones.
Dr. Lepsius saw and observed with great interest this, which he judged to be a sepulchral monument: he took the imprint of its hieroglyphics, and promised an interpretation of it. The authority of such a judge will silence those who, not knowing its value, or envying its possession, cried out that it was false.

Terra cotta sarcophagus. Abela already spoke of three terra cotta sarcophagi, which he kept in his museum. (1) He gave the drawing of one, and he says it was found in 1621 in the district of Ghar-Barca, a place not far from the Medina. The other two were similar to that one: but none of the three reached us.
The sarcophagus of which I am speaking resembles only in general form the ones mentioned by our historiographer, and was also found in the district of Ghar-Barca in 1797. You are right to believe that the Egyptians had their main metropolis in this part of the island.
This beautiful remnant of antiquity is 4 feet 11 inches long, and decreases from one foot 11 inches to 9 1/2 inches. The largest periphery taken across the chest, which is prominent, to indicate the sex, is 5 feet, the smallest 3. A lid of the same material covers it along its entire length. The youthful face is modeled with great skill in plastic art, with flat eyes and not deeply sunken, as in Greek statues, and the eyebrows indicated only by a slight prominence. The toes are also beautiful, delicately protruding from the bundle, which appears to envelop the body. The female breast is indicated by two modest findings.
Of the damsel's corpse, locked there, only a little dust was found, to which it had returned, and a simple iron ring, which perhaps had been placed on her finger as a sign of affection by someone who was dear to her. (2)
It is known how the Egyptians prized this metal: and the iron rings found in Egyptian tombs prove that they used to put it on the fingers of the dead. (3)
To those who demand hieroglyphics on our sarcophagi to canonize them without doubt as Egyptians, I will say that this would be the same as wanting the name of the person inscribed under the portrait to recognize them. Furthermore, on the two white granite sarcophagi found in the two great pyramids of Gizech, and on the ablution basin of Cheops there is no hieroglyphics whatsoever. And they leave without the two lions at the entrance to the Capitoline Hill, the Osiris of the Barberini palace, the obelisk that rises in front of Santa Maria Maggiore, and the other in front of San Pietro. Yet it never occurred to anyone that such monuments are not truly Egyptian.
It remains to be seen why no embalmed body has ever been found in so many mortuary coffins.
The embalming process required many elements that the nature of the Maltese soil, and the civil condition of the Egyptians living here could not offer. The three classes of people employed to carry out this funeral rite belonged to the privileged caste of priests and doctors, who were sufficiently rich and well-off in Egypt, had a permanent residence there, and never marked the colonizers, whose condition was certainly not to be compared to that of the colonizers of our times. The scribe, who was responsible for marking the length of the incision to be made on the corpse, was therefore missing: the paraschite was missing, who, having made the cut, immediately began to flee to avoid the stones of the people present: there was no one to remove all the viscera, except the heart and the kidneys: finally, the pourer of the cedar oil, myrrh, cassia, cinnamon, and other fragrant substances was missing.
Without many ministers, who were required by law to practice this particular art; devoid of such a variety and diversity of grocery stores not found on the island; those ancient inhabitants were content to place the corpses of perhaps the most notable among them in sarcophagi, which at least had the appearance of their mummy coffins; eager to perpetuate their national customs in any way compatibly with the means that the hospitable island offered them.
And here it is appropriate to recall how Malta has never enjoyed the addition of forest: and that consequently it could not offer large tree trunks, suitable for being hollowed out to contain corpses. Furthermore, the alabaster quarry in Gozo was not discovered until during the Magisterium of Despuig (1735-1741), and that of San Giuliano in Malta only in 1768: not even a word can be said about a few small blocks of marble found by chance: the choice was therefore between the common stone and the figulina clay. And the Egyptians with great wisdom chose the latter in preference, both because it was more long-lasting and also because it was more suited to the plastic art that they had brought so much further.

Among the bronze monuments, a seated ISIS can be seen, broken in the lower part from the femur downwards, and without the arms that she once had and which perhaps supported the nursing Gold. She carries on her head a kind of basket, even if we don't want to say a tower, which would qualify her for the turreted Isis depicting Cybele.

A silent HARPOCRATES who bends to sit. It is very similar to that of the Knight Fontaine, reported by Montfaucon volume 2, copper 123, No. 4. Ours also carries on his head that immense encumbrance of amphorae and glasses: but the horn that descends on his right humerus is not the base of that machine, but rather the symbolic Horn of plenty.

Varj OSIRIDI: among which one having two rings to hang it transversely. It is not out of place to suppose that the Egyptians, eminently superstitious, chose this divinity from their Pantheon to protect travellers, and that they consequently hung his effigy around their necks.

Some STATUETTES of cooked earth, covered with greenish paint, and decorated with hieroglyphics, which were used to be buried with the corpses. They all resemble each other, except for one which is much smaller than the others, and whose paint and signs have worn away due to the age of time and the condition of the place where it remained buried for so many centuries. There has been an abundance of such Mani at various times and in various places on the island. And there are those who own no small number.

I will not ignore the famous gold PLATE, found in a case of the same metal, near the Medina in 1694. The hieroglyphics with which it was covered could well be assimilated to those of the Isiac Tablet. This Egyptian plaque was spoken of in the fourth Collection of Memorable Letters, in the Proceedings of the Leipzig Scholars, and by Montfaucon as a monument of the highest importance. Well: Can. Costanzo, who had received it from someone who did not know its value, made it his duty to point it out to Cardinal Cantelmi, previously Inquisitor in Malta, and then Archbishop in Naples: and to perhaps dissolve some debt of friendship, he certainly deprived his homeland of an object, which could form the main adornment of every museum.

Before finishing, I think it appropriate to give an account of two recently discovered monuments, which, although they do not belong to the periods mentioned, are nevertheless of such interest as to preserve their memory, which may perhaps be of useful information to those who wish to deal with our Greek, Roman and Christian antiquities.
In early September 1860, excavations were being carried out in a private estate in the Rabato of the Medina, in the Ta-bir-el-liun district, in order to lay the foundations of a new windmill. At a depth of 10 feet they thought they had reached the living fortress: but they were only walls, composed of cut stones, each 6 to 8 palms long and three palms thick. The stones were of finished work, and arranged, without cement of any kind, with such art that the interstices completely disappeared. These walls ran in various directions, and it never happened that any one met the other at right angles: which made it difficult to guess what sort of Greek building they served as a base for.
Among the materials that filled the spaces between such walls, many scraps of figurine vases and monochrome mosaics were found, some pieces of colored and shiny plaster, and a polychrome mosaic, representing a beautiful bunch of flowers.
But the most interesting object is a remnant of an inscription in Greek characters, scratched on a plaster like a thin brick-colored slab. It reads Lybiae, and some remains of decoration can still be seen.
Two fragments of shiny plaster, the polychrome mosaic and the inscription are preserved in the Library Museum, and were deposited there by the architect Mr. Conti, director of those works.
At the end of May 1874, on the northern slope of the “Tal Gesuiti” hill in Marsa Grande, when work was underway on the construction of some buildings, a Catacomb was discovered, which within a few days had to be closed up. But first of all, care was taken to remove an exact plan with the respective sections, which is now hanging on one of the walls of the Museum. In some of the niches, and in some of the burials, which amount to 34, human bones were found mixed with a large quantity of figurine remains.
A few steps above the Catacomb, and at a depth of four feet, a Latin epigraph was excavated, admirable for the simplicity of the dictation, and of great Christian interest, belonging to the fifth or sixth century of the church. Dessa is engraved on a slab of local stone, almost pyramidal in shape, 2 feet 7 inches high, on a 14 inch base.
At the top you can see the Navicella engraved, a symbol that Christians often used to engrave or paint on sepulchral monuments in Rome until the fifth century, and later in the provinces. Meanwhile, here is a faithful copy of the epigraph -

D. M.
FLYIVS TITVS
VIXITANNOS
LVCIVESBE
NEMERENTI
FECERUNT.


Which one would read

To God the Great
Flavius ​​Titus
He lived 50 years 
Citizens 
Well-deserved
They did.


Mr. N. Sacco, owner of the place from which it was extracted, commendably donated this stone to the Library Museum, and is now found embedded in one of the walls of the same.
Would to heaven that the example of the Grand Master, the Canon and others were not so often followed; but yes the one given by Messrs. Conti and Sacco! We would then have a public museum, full of monuments from every period, to serve as an illustration of the civil and religious history of these islands.

END.




(1) Agius speaks of another of the same material and form, which was found in Gozo near the church of San Francesco. Gozo illustrato.
(2) Etiam nunc sponsae anulus ferreus mittitur, isque sine gemma. PLINIUS I, 33, c. 1.
(3) Wilkinson's Manners and Customs of ancient Egyptians, vol 3, pag. 242:



