ANCIENT MONUMENTS
In the
MALTA GROUP;
PHOENICIAN AND EGYPTIAN PERIOD.

ANGLO-MALTESE typography.


OF ANCIENT MONUMENTS
IN THE
MALTA GROUP
HISTORICAL NOTES
OF THE
DR CESARE VASSALLO.
PHOENICIAN AND EGYPTIAN PERIOD.
VALLETTA,
1851.


To His Most Honorable Lordship
Se Barone Sondesborough
Knight Commander of the Guelph Order, Member of the Royal Society and that of Antiquaries of London
&c. &c. &c.
My Lord,
When I had the honor of accompanying her through the interesting antiquities of this one, and of showing her some precious objects which are preserved in the museum of this public library; I promised to write to you whenever necessary, and to send you some notes in relation to such monuments, which are the most truthful history of the successive foreign dominations to which Malta succumbed, and of the religious and civil events which naturally arose there.


By publishing this first volume, which includes a brief description of Phoenician and Egyptian monuments, and by offering it, as I owed it to you, Mr. Baron, I partly repay you for the words given to you.
Welcome him kindly, and grant him the patronage he so badly needs.
I have the honor of being
My Lord
Your most affectionate servant CESARE VASSALLO.
MALTA,
of Library,
5 April 1851.



A FEW WORDS OF WARNING.

The Phoenician and Egyptian monumental remains which I will mention in this booklet are certainly not all the existing ones, nor all the ones found in the Maltese Group: but if of Architecture they are those which were either entirely or partially excavated; if of Sculpture and Plastic only those which are preserved in the Museum of this Public Library: the one therefore and the other visible to every ordinary person.
There are many of the former who still lie cluttered by their ruins in the surroundings of Gudia, Zabbar, Musta, Medina, and on the island of Gozo: and numerous latter are in private collections. Of those, one could only point to ruins that protrude from the surface; It is not worth talking about these, since they are hidden worse than they were in the depths of the earth from which they were dug up, and it is only with difficulty that they can sometimes be admired by intelligent people.






PHOENICIAN PERIOD.

The ÆNEIDS lib. i.

PHENICIA properly so called, having regard to the size of its territory, could be counted among the smallest states of antiquity, even during the times of its most flourishing condition (1): inhabited, however, by an eminently commercial people, it had become among those of the first magnitude.
Its colonies were numerous, which governed themselves exclusively: and in this respect they were completely independent from the mother country, as they were from each other. The only bond that tied them together were common commercial interests, civil customs, religious customs, the cult of their Gods, and above all of Melcarte, their great national and colonial divinity (2).
From this naturally arose the indescribable care they took to introduce the cult of their gods wherever the love of traffic led them. In Memphis itself, they had built a chapel to Astarte not very far from the temple of Proteus, to whom they paid divine honors (3).
Malta, which, hidden among the waves, lies halfway between Sidon and Gadez, offered a suitable storage place for the manufactures of Tyre, the perfumes of Arabia and the silver of Spain: it also offered a friendly refuge in the winter seasons, and a soil, if not of spontaneous abundance, certainly not ungrateful to the sweat of a diligent farmer. The Phoenicians had known all these advantages, and a colony leaving from Tire or Sidon took peaceful possession of the Island (4) fourteen centuries and more before Christ.
Having thus had a fixed seat in Malta, the Phoenicians seem to have had the idea of ​​transforming it into a great national Pantheon; there are so many sacred buildings that they built there, so many divinities that they worshiped there.
But the concept of their temples is almost identical in all of them: and this uniformity seems to arise from some pre-established religious law, which prohibited the architect from designing new plans and using different devices, since the building had to represent a symbolic expression, from which no it was permissible to leave. I hope to be able to unravel this mystery later on, once I get to grips with it. Meanwhile, despite such identity in thought, there is a great deal of inequality in execution: which leads one to reasonably believe that many years have been interposed between the first and last erected, that is, between that of Bir-Zebbugia, and that of Mnaidra .
I will therefore proceed to speak of these temples according to the chronological order of their erection; judging this order not so much by the worse or better preservation of the same, but by the lesser or greater degree of perfection in the execution of the design.

(1) Heeren, Historical Researches, translated from the German; Vol. 1.
(2) Heeren, loco citato.
(3) Mignot, 22me mem. sur les Pheniciens.
(4) Diod. Sicily, 204 marg. lat. version




Architectural monuments.

Temple of Melcarte (1).


The temple of Melcarte, ipetro like all the others, stood on the hill overlooking Bir-Zebbugia (2) at a distance of about 700 feet from the sea shore, to the north of the church of San Giorgio. Thus anyone from other regions who came to cast their vote could greet him from afar. Two portions of hemicycles, which a straight wall of about 33 feet unites and joins, is all that remains of them. The entire device is made of irregular polygon stones, superimposed on each other, and which derive their solidity from their size (3). The rest that many centuries have caused to fall clutters the internal area: so when you see this rest of the temple from a certain distance, it appears to you as a giant pile of stones, partly covered by the shadow of centuries-old carob trees, which perhaps sink your roots to the sacred threshold. The current state of the temple does not allow much more to be said about it: but there are many accessories nearby, which increase the value in which this precious monument, already mentioned by Ptolemy and many others, should be held.
Going up from the marina to the temple, three large monoliths appear halfway up, forming a sort of vestibule. The stone that serves as the architrave and roof, placed in a somewhat inclined position (4), is 15 feet 9 inches long (5); of the two verticals one is 11 feet 3 inches high and the other 10 feet 7 inches. I am led to believe that two surrounding walls joined this first sacred limit, beyond which no woman was allowed to penetrate (6). This is true, the whole building would have had an axis of about 300 feet, and would justify in some part Quintinus (7), who visited it three centuries ago, had given it dimensions which were believed to be exaggerated by Cluverio, who perhaps did not had ever seen, much less measured. This vestibule is now reduced by the land manager into a miserable shelter for animals.
The shore is entirely pierced, almost at sea level, with circular pits, from eight to two feet deep, wider at the base than at the mouth. They all present a vigorous fire action, the surface having been calcined to a depth of two inches.
It is worthy of observation, in this bank, the change in level, produced by slow and progressive sinking, in a period subsequent to the excavation of said pits, but very remote from us, so that no memory of it remained. Some of the sunken trenches are naturally half filled with sea water; and some rails are still being insensibly lost at sea.
Abela believed that these pits served as oil tanks, with which they filled the narrows of the nearby Zeitun district (8). Ciantar reproduces the same sentence (9): and my learned friend, Professor Zerafa, also did not hesitate to call them oil canoves (10).
I will not follow the opinion of any of these historiographers, and I will briefly say why.
First of all, I am not of the opinion that the Zeitun district, or any other district of the island, was ever so rich in olive groves as to extract so much oil, to fill it as if in storage, and then send it abroad. We often talked about our apples, our cotton cloths, the white of our houses, our dogs, and our roses: but among the ancients there was no one who admired the abundance of our oil, or who even mentioned it. But, it will be said, that the Zeitun oil could well have been used for consumption on the island: but in this case, why transport it to Cala San Giorgio, expose it to the bad weather of the open sky, and to the humidity of the nearby sea? Was there perhaps a fortress missing in the Zeitun district, where to dig tanks or oil pits?
Furthermore, either the oil was stored there before or after the sinking. Not before, since the worshipers of the god would not have allowed a load of oil within the inviolable limits of the temple: and even if they had allowed it, the owners would not have been so foolish to put the oil in tubs or cellars, than a wave from the east or by sirocco it would have easily covered. Not afterwards since it is not reasonable to suppose that there were Zeitunini so crazy as to preserve the oil in cellars or tanks already partly filled with sea water.
But before saying what I think of these pits, and of other similar ones that are found in the valley under the temple; It seems necessary to remind me how all the Phoenician colonies had the obligation to light large fires every year, in a given season, in honor of this main deity of theirs.
Having now explained how and where these pits are dug and arranged, their number, their unusability for the object supposed by Abela and Zerafa, and finally the indelible mark of the igneous action; it seems to me that we can assure ourselves with moral certainty that they were made for the use of furnaces, that is to contain the bonfires, which formed an integral part of the religious ritual of the worshipers of Melcarte.
Houël, misled by the reading of Abela and Ciantar, believed the temple of the Phoenician Hercules to be in Marsascirocco cove, properly so called, not very far from the church of Our Lady ad Nives (to the Snows). He also designed and published a beautiful wall of 90 feet in length, as the only and venerable remnant - although he confesses that he cannot understand what part of the temple such a long and isolated wall could have served (11).
It seems strange to me, however, that Huël, who had observed so much, had not immediately recognized it as a building from a period much later than the Phoenician era: much more so since from Ciantar he would have been able to know (12) how part of the nearby floor was paved with local marble, and part composed of monochrome mosaic. Huël who had seen the ruins of Bir-Zebbugia, and affirmed that they were of very ancient construction and of the type of the Gozitan Giganteia (13), and therefore Phoenician; he could reasonably have concluded that these pieces of wall really belonged to the temple of Hercules Tyrio.
I will conclude with Nidersted’s words (14): Hodie dicti templi (Herculis) monumenta admiratione dignissima adhuc supersunt, apud portum, quem Marsascirocco vocant, ad Ecclesiam ibi vicinam Sancto Georgio sacram. (To-day the monuments of the said temple (of Hercules) still remain, worthy of admiration, at the port, which they call Marsascirocco, to the church near there, sacred to St. George.)
It is not necessary to mention the error into which Abela himself, and Agius after him (15), believed that the statue of Hercules, which is preserved in the museum of this Library, was transported from Phoenicia, and also believed it to be the simulacrum of god worshiped in the temple by the Phoenicians. The Hercules in our museum is that of Thebes, and not of Tyre, and is made of Greek chisel, even if we didn't want to call it Roman. I claim that in the temples built to Melcarte was no other simulacrum than the Flame.

Irrestincta focis servant altaria flammœ,
Sed nulla effigies, simulacrave nota Deorum (16).
(The altars keep the flames unextinguished from the hearths,
But there are no portraits, simulacrums known to the Gods) (16).


(1) This divinity was called Hercules Tyrius by the Greeks, completely different from their Hercules, although the myths are often confused with it. 
(2) Small sea bay in the vast port of Marsascirocco, which the ancients called Porto Ercole.
(3) Many maintain that the Phoenicians were the inventors of architecture, or we would rather say those who spread it to the West, and that they are symbolized under the name of Cyclopes and Pelasgians. Fosbroke's Encyclopedia of Antiquities. Cantù Historical Encyclopedia, vol. Archeology.
(4) Such monuments of primitive architecture can be seen in abundance in Great Britain; and it was those of Tire or Sidon who introduced the art and custom of building buildings. And the law of tilting the stone above is generally seen in everyone. Gwilt Encyclop. of Architecture.
(5) The largest of the blocks of Kit's Cotty House in England is not more than 12 feet long, and that of the famous Lyons Gate in Mycenae soll 11.
(6) Silius Italicus libro III.
(7) Descriptio Melitæ.
(8) Della Descrittione di Malta, pag. 21.
(9) Malta Illustrata, pag. 100.
(10) Istoria fisica di Malta, pag. 16.
(11) Voyage pittoresque, Vol. IV, pag. 92.
(12) Malta Illustrata. Vol. I, pag. 461.
(13) Loco citato.
(14) Malta Vetus et Nova. Helmstad 1669.
(15) In a dissertation. ms. which is kept in the public library. 
(16) Sil. Ital. libro III.



Temple of Juno.

Of the temple of Juno all that remains is the memory in the traditions handed down to us, and in the volumes of the ancients: and I will mention it using what they said about it.
It stood on the promontory where the Sant'Angelo castle now towers, in whose ditch Quintino (3) had seen huge remains, which occupied a large amount of land. It was near Cicero and very holy and very ancient; and the Goddess could be said to be proud of it as well as that of her favorite Samo (4). And if this temple could not boast of its weapons and chariot like Carthage (5); However, it was very rich due to the gifts that were offered there. The large port, which it dominated, bore the name of the Goddess. The enemies who landed there, especially during the Punic battles, and the pirates who took furtive refuge there in the winter seasons, always considered it inviolable and sacred.
The captain of the army of Masinissa, having arrived in Malta, removed from this temple some elephant teeth of enormous size, which he sent as a present to his king. However, shortly after, he realized how much of a sacred place he had taken from them, and sent them back on a quinquireme to their former place, with an inscription which meant in his language: "the king had ignorantly accepted them, and very willingly returned them."(5).
But as the years passed, the greedy Verres, despiser of men and gods, unlike the Numidian king, whom the Romans called barbarian, purposely sent his venereal servants there, who stripped the temple of its riches and works of art, ivory, representing victories, executed with marvelous art. The Maltese ambassadors complained vehemently about it before the senate, and Tullius repeated their just complaints before the judges (7).
It is easy to infer that the temple of Juno remained intact until the late Roman domination, and that the Romans themselves continued to venerate it, worshiping the goddess for whose cult it had been built by the Phoenicians.
Professor Zerafa (8) believes that the granite column, which is found in the chapel of the Sant'Angelo castle, belonged to the temple of Juno. But besides that he did not indicate any reason on which he founded this belief; it is not possible to know what use the shaft of a single granite column could have served, in a temple sub dio (under God), in a temple which we have reason to believe was built using local stone: remembering that Quintinus, speaking about it he made no mention of marbles, and remembering that our stone exclusively lent material to the construction of the other temples. Unless we want to assume that it was a votive column, like the two candelabra of the temple of Melcarte, and that perhaps it did not deserve the attention of the henchmen of Verres. 



(1) In a dissertation. ms. which is kept in the public library. 
(2) Sil. Ital.. book III.
(3) Loco citato.
(4) In Verrem IV et v.
(5) Æneidos libro I.
(6) Val. Max. libro 1, c. 2.
(7) Loco citato.
(8) Storia Artistica di Malta.




Temple of Astarte in Gozo.

This temple is better known under the name of "Tower of the Giants" and this was given to it, who knows how many centuries ago, for its circular shapes and for the enormous boulders that surround it. It is already common practice among the Maltese to call any circular building whose object is not known a "tower": this is how the temple of Bir-Zebbugia, Torri-giauhar (tower of the pearls) is called Torri-tal-hud (tower of the Jews). a beautiful sepulchral monument not far from Gudia, and Torri-tal-ghassieui (guardian's tower) the rest of an ancient construction in the district of the same village.
General Alberto della Marmora, in a letter to Mr. Raoul Rochette, published in the Annales nouvelles de l'Institution archeologique, already spoke in great detail about this temple built to Astarte, the Phoenician Venus: and Mr. Mazzara had published some views of it before him and a plant, calling it the "Antediluvian Temple of the Giants." And although Mazzara's opinion is extremely pompous, it does not fail to meet with the approval of many, who do not find valuable a monument that has not remained under flood waters for 150 days, and which in addition has not been erected by people, who at least weren't twenty feet tall.





Hhagiar Kim Tempel


Hhagiar Kim (Worship Stones) is a place about a mile south of Krendi village. Already in ancient times the colossal boulders that rise there had aroused admiration and curiosity in those who had visited it: and it was a common desire that work would once be done to clean the space that those boulders surrounded from the stones that cluttered it ; being sure that something interesting for archaeological science in general, and more particularly for the civil and religious history of the Maltese Group would without fail be revealed. Consequently, in November 1839, Sir H. F. Bouverie authorized Sir V. Casolani, collector of public revenue, to undertake the excavation, which lasted two months and was discovered as the Phoenician temple of Hhagiar Kim now stands.
It was certainly inadvertence to have placed Mr. Vance in charge of the excavation, who does not appear to have had sufficient foresight and sufficient knowledge to direct such an interesting undertaking. I certainly won't say what much he should have done and didn't do, but I won't hesitate to accuse him of negligence in not having a public account of the daily operations, and of every object found there, and above all of the precise place where everything was found. Every lover of science would welcome it, and we would not now beg for information and news from the people employed at the time to dig, generally idiots, and on the faith of whose words it is best to stand, more often than not, against one's own conviction. But let this stream be closed.
Having taken a look at the plan of the temple, two parallel spaces appear, with an oblong circular shape, compressed, and of unequal extension. The larger one runs at 105 (English) feet, the other at 80. The two widths added together amount to 70 feet.
Two others join the first space, almost of the same shape, but only 38 feet long each.
The surrounding wall is built of colossal stones, mostly placed vertically: as are also the walls of the internal subdivisions.
There are various approaches: but there is no question that the main one was the one looking at the eastern regions.
Having taken into account the hemicycles, divided from the rest with special stones, and the two spaces that join the larger area; it is clear that the concept was to make seven main divisions.
A few steps from the wall, four slabs can be observed which rise to 14 and 15 feet, and which, joined at the lower end, cover a line of 27 feet: and two others of almost the same size, and a seventh block.
In one of the main spaces you can see an interestingly shaped altar. It is a quadrangle, 2 feet 5 inches high, and a foot and a half wide on each side. Eight small pillars protrude from the corners, supporting an abacus: and on the interposed facades two portions of snakes are represented in high relief, joined at one point, from which a palm tree begins which covers and adorns the entire surface with its branches. On the abacus rises four inches high a circle a foot or more in diameter. All the surfaces except the upper one of the circle are perforated in every direction.
Near the described altar is the sacred slab stuck between two parallel and vertical stones. The same is usually perforated across the entire surface, and half of the egg can be seen in high relief between two raised spiral lines. The sacred slab rests along its entire length on a dais, which is certainly the sacred threshold. In the space between the two aforementioned large stones, large quantities of quadruped bones were found: and it is believed that by digging further, the ossuary pit would be found.
Furthermore, many pieces of vases of various sizes were found: some decorated with tiles, others with circles; part chiselled, part relief; all cooked. Three monopods made of a single stone are still intact, and the same ruins under which they already lay for so many centuries have preserved them.
In some places of the temple, which no one is able to indicate, many concave-convex stones were found: others conical in shape, others hemispherical: which when paired and united would form either a sphere or an egg. The respective size varies, that is, from 5 inches to 3½ inches in diameter.
But the most precious object among the finds are certainly seven statuettes made of local stone, various in size, with severed heads. And perhaps the only ones of Phoenician art that have come down to us. Two sit, and a large skirt surrounds and covers them, distinctive of their feminine sex: and one of the two has a braid of hair running down her back to her heels. Four are crouched down and completely naked. A seventh, which is the largest, is mutilated from the knees down, and an area covers it from the navel to mid-thigh. In all of them there is an obesity to be observed which makes them bizarrely similar, and which, in spite of yourself, makes you laugh. In two, where the neck joins the torso, there is a concavity, and some practicable holes, to fit into, and secure a false head. The bases or formed by the edges of the respective skirts, or by the crouched limbs, are circular and measure from 1 foot 8 inches to 3 feet at the periphery: the heights vary from 7 to 9 inches. The largest of the figurines would fit perfectly in a circle of just over four feet. It should be noted that when viewed from the front they represent an external line composed of two semicircles of unequal diameter, the smaller one superimposed on the larger one. And a dominant thought appears to make the circular lines stand out in every part and in every member of them.
The whole of this temple and the most noteworthy accessories that were found there have thus been briefly described; I will proceed to freely say what I feel, hoping that if my words are not able to persuade the wise and erudite, they will at least serve to push them to have their say, with greater certainty of success. Which if it happens, will certainly bring me no small glory.
The Cosmogony of the Phoenicians led them very naturally to the cult of the Universe, to that of the procreative Power and to Astrolatry. They symbolized the Universe under the appearance of an Egg, which if broken in two represented the sky and the earth: the procreative Power, with more modesty than the Etruscans and Romans, under that of one or two appeased Serpents, or two Spiral lines: and the Stars in constant circular figures (1).
Since Astrolaters they raised their temples under God, because either the vivid ray of "he who lights up the whole world" or that of the silent moon, or of the lesser stars would enliven them, embellish them and because the Gods, who had affixed to the stars (2), could without the interposition of an indiscreet turn better welcome their gifts, and listen better to their wishes.
This same cult had prescribed the norm to the geometric lines of their temples. The circular belt is therefore observable in everyone, since the circle is the surest expression, the most apparently true image of every star. Then again the conjunction of the Hemicycles by straight walls, in order to remember the conjunction of some stars in assigned periods.
Nor did this cult merely prescribe the rule to the architect: it directed the sculptor's chisel, the figula maker's wheel, and perhaps the painter's pencil. The statuettes, as I said above, have round limbs, circular bases, and circular external lines. The shape of the votive vases was round, the ornaments circular or tending towards a circle. This is evidenced by the beautiful things preserved in this museum, and by the many reduced to pieces, which have already been mentioned. Furthermore, the sacred slab is perforated throughout its surface, as it was supposed to represent myriads of stars.
But if the architectural concept is identical in all the temples, if this concept is an arcane expression, if the same sacred slabs, the sacred rocks themselves, and the same decorations are constantly repeated in all; it must be inferred without much hesitation that such temples were mainly built for the deities themselves, that is, for all the stars in general. I said mainly, since it is equally certain that each of them was secondarily dedicated to a particular god. Thus we saw that of Bir-Zebbugia in Hercules, that of the great port in Juno, and that of Gozo in Astarte.
But a nation established on the coasts of a navy more than 150 miles long, and which derived its splendor and riches from navigation and commerce, must well remain grateful to those who had built the first ship for it, marked the first furrow in the sea, and were well versed in astronomical science: and for this the CABIRI well deserved the honor of the Apotheosis from the Phoenicians.
There were seven (3), all children of Sidek, which in our language sounds like "Your Lord." An eighth was added to them, called Esmun, or Aesculapius, who was however venerated with a special cult and to whom temples were particularly built. Of the Cabiri two were females, Axieros and Axiokersa, Ceres and Proserpina (4).
Furthermore, the Cabiri had written the theology revealed by Tot to the Phoenicians, had discovered the use of simple words, the way of healing from poisonous bites, and the art of enchantments, that is, of restoring health by murmuring mysterious words. Then they were given the name Kbir, which Varro and Tertullian interpret as Potens. And in the Maltese language, isn't Kbir the same as saying big, mighty?
The cult of the Cabiri is still shrouded in mysterious darkness, as only priests were allowed to enter their sanctuaries. Cabirorum fanum solis sacerdotibus permissum. (Only the priests were allowed to fan the cabirs.) Herod, lib. III. And the very simulacra of this divinity had something mysterious about them, with a ridiculous shape and appearance, and reddish to the Volcano of Memphis, which, when seen by Cambyses, excited him to excessive laughter. Cabirorum simulachra erant Vulcani simulachris similia: forma nimirum et species utriusque ridicula ..... Cambises Memphiticum Vulcani templum ingressus, statuam ejus excepit multo risu (The simulacrums of the Cabiris were similar to those of the Vulcans: the shape and appearance of both were, of course, ridiculous .....Cambyses entered the Memphite temple of Vulcan, and received his statue with much laughter)(5).
Once the Cabiri were deified, as we said, it came to pass that temples should be given to them. And the Phoenicians actually built several of them, among which I will remember that of Berito, as famous as the temple of Neptune (6). It is not to say that even in Esmun they were particularly erected, and one could admire them in the noblest part, that is, in the middle of Carthage (7).
It was appropriate that the Phoenician-Maltese colony, persuaded of the same beliefs, and induced by the same interests, followed the example of the others. But it is not the only reason of convenience that leads us to believe so. There is, apparently, such positive evidence that there is no doubt at all that the Phoenicians did not build a temple to the Seven Cabiri Brothers, and that such a temple is not this one of Hhagiar Kim.
Seven, as I have already said, are the main divisions of the temple, and seven are the large stones that rise before reaching the walls: a symbol of the power and number of the deities worshiped there.
The same district where this temple stands is called Rahhal Kbir, a village that could not be called either large or powerful par excellence. In fact, Duzzina only gives a mere count of it (8), and Abela assures that it did not contain more than twenty-one fires.
But what shall we say of the analogy and perfect resemblance between the seven figures described by us, and those of which Herodotus speaks? It seems that the father of history wanted to adapt the phrase "forma et species utriusque ridicula" (the form and appearance of both are ridiculous) to ours. And I can assure you that when seen for the first time they have made more than one Cambyse laugh, perhaps the least likely to laugh: they are so squat and dwarf.
Argue that two of them are women, and they will certainly want to be Ceres and Proserpina Cabire. The Zone that surrounds the largest of the seven will symbolize the Zodiac, as a sign of the highest Cabiric expertise in the science of the stars.
It aroused curiosity how these figurines had been found without heads, and how two of them had false heads.
First, I will observe that more ancient statues reached us broken, or without any limbs, than whole ones; the most celebrated museums attest to this. In this Group of Malta the beautiful one found in Gozo and now preserved in the garrison library; the Roman one posted under the Medina gate; and the statue of Theban Hercules, the head is cut off: and if that of Hercules has it, it was placed on it by the chisel of Casha.
The reasons for such mutilations are so obvious that there is no point in repeating them. I will add that of hatred and religious aversion. Once the Christians had emerged from the catacombs, and were free from the constant persecutions, which they willingly went against, as a testimony of their faith; perhaps they too will have broken some heads and cut off some noses of some of the innumerable multitude of gods, who had eyes and did not see, ears and did not listen.
The use of false heads seems to have been common among the ancients, who perhaps took it from the Phoenicians.
Suetonius (9) says that instead of breaking the statues of the Caesars, of hateful memory, they removed their heads, which they replaced with others of other beloved and dear Caesars. And in the year 1761 on the hills of Piacenza in Velleja, well-preserved and healthy imperial statuettes were discovered, which had false heads, which were removed and replaced on the trunk as and when they wanted. Each head ended in a cone, which entered a recess made in the neck of the statuette (10).
But none of the heads of our Cabiric figurines were found. And I am of the opinion that either, being made of more fragile material than stone, they will not have resisted the impact of the boulders that fell on them, or being made of more precious material they will have aroused the greed of those who little believed in the power of the divinity that they represented; and that this unbeliever will have seized it without any scruple whatsoever.
The altar described above suggests that it was for sacrifices to Hecate. Let us remember that in the cave sacred to the Cabiri in Samothrace, dogs were sacrificed to this Goddess, since the barking of dogs, according to Sophro, scares away the ghosts (11). And perhaps the cells formed of three monoliths, which can be seen in some parts of the temple, were used to keep the dogs to be sacrificed. The palm tree with which this altar is decorated revives our memory of the religious importance that the Phoenicians attributed to the palm branch. They held it as a mark of high respect: and they covered their faces with a palm branch when they addressed their vows and prayers to their Gods (12).
The monopods were probably used to deposit the vases on them, the debris of which was found cluttering up a large piece of land, and which were perhaps of some necessity in the mysterious initiations of the Coes.
The Skull unearthed in the excavations of this temple together with the rest of the skeleton, and which is currently preserved in the museum of this Library, should not be overlooked. Much has been said about its monstrosity and its antiquity. In the midst of this argument, let me reproduce some of the many observations that my learned friend Professor Galland has already published on this subject (13).
"This skull is evidently that of an adult, and rather of a male aged between 30 and 40. It is very interesting, whether we want to consider it as a mere accidental monstrosity, or whether we want to consider it as an indication of the existence of a race, variety of race, or individuals with such characters, in some remote time. In fact, it presents a much more acute facial angle (14) than has been found until now (if we are not greatly mistaken) in the human species.”
Elsewhere, this is how Dr Galland responds to those who ask him the era attributable to the skull. "Certainly a very interesting question, which cannot be answered at the moment, since it is very difficult, although not impossible, to determine how long the bones can last. A thousand elements contribute: the age of the individual, the way in which he is buried, the nature of the soil, and other circumstances may vary the duration of maintenance of the bones."
It seems, however, that the learned professor is of the opinion that if the director of the excavation had taken and given an account of the way in which the skeleton lay, where it looked, if wrapped, and in what: in short, if Mr. Vance had taken exact account of all the operations in an excavation of such importance: perhaps some conclusions could have been reached also in relation to the era relating to this skull.
Having repaid what they owed to the Seven Cabiri, all that remained was for the Phoenicians to dedicate a temple to the particular cult of Esmun, the eighth brother: and they still fulfilled this other duty, raising the

Temple of Mnaidra

which is about a mile from that of the brothers so that the two are within sight of each other, and as if they were mutually protecting each other. By building two temples to members of the same deified lineage so close together, the Phoenicians showed how much respect they held for family relationships and how much importance they had for them.
This temple is certainly the best preserved of all, and is also the most elegant, so that it seems to have been built when the art of building was in its greatest perfection among the Phoenicians. It remained unnoticed because it was distant from the consortium of men, and therefore safer from their devastation, until the time of the excavation of Hhagiar Kim: when the slabs that rose giantly from the midst of the accumulated rubble were seen; he thought, if perhaps they weren't from some temple enclosure. Then in May 1840 the excavation work was undertaken, under the direction of Mr. Vance himself, and this very interesting monument rose to greet the sun again.
As with that of Astarte in Gozo, this one could be said to be two contiguous temples, and not communicating. In fact, the plan offers you to see two distinct areas, each composed of two elongated, parallel circles of unequal dimensions, and accessible due to a large opening in the wall that distinguishes and separates them. The smaller area, which however seems to have been the temple itself, has a magnificent and gigantic entrance, which seems to be the work of yesterday, and which faces the sirocco.
To the right of this entrance some repositories can be observed, or we would say low chambers, which there is every reason to believe were built to house the dogs, which were supposed to guard the temple: a custom religiously observed in all the temples of Aesculapius (15 ).
The larger area has the opening, through which to enter, rather narrow: and in front of it the south winds. Knowing how much trust the Phoenicians placed in the healing power of this God, and how numerous they led their sick to his temple, where he was assigned to the same place; it will not be out of line to suppose that they used this space as a hospital, covering it where appropriate with a parapetasma to protect the poor sick people who were taken there for treatment from the sun and the rain that could occur.
It is appropriate for me to observe here that if this temple, and that of Hhagiar Kim, were to become virgin of the much stone that still encumbers it, and the way to the underground passages were attempted, which intelligent people and local scholars ascertain exist there; we could perhaps arrive at the discovery of some monumental object that would lead us to some historical truth, which until now has remained in darkness and mystery.
I will not end the description of the religious buildings of the Phoenicians without mentioning the one which stands unnoticed on the hill of Corradino. Only a small portion of it was excavated in 1840, and only about five feet deep; and two beautiful entrances were soon discovered, leading to the usual hemicycles, and with the same apparatus of very large stones. There is no doubt that by cleaning up that surrounding area, marked on the surface by large boulders, which invite you to dig; not even in Corradino would an entire building be discovered, not inferior in interest to the others excavated so far.



(1) Faber's Origin of Pagan Idolatry. 
(2) Vico Scienza Nuova, libro II, pag. 331.
(3) Eusebil Præp. Evang. libro I, cap. x. 
(4) Bocharti Geogr. Sacra, col. 394.
(5) Herod. apud Bochart. col. 396. 
(6) Euseb. ibidem. 
(7) Strab. XVIII.
(8) Acta visitationis, 1574.
(9) Vitæ XII Cæs.
(10) Dell'Architettura Egiziana, dissertazione, Parma Bodoni 1786, pag. 98.
(11) Bochart loco citato, pag. 397.
(12) Hist. de l'Acad. des Inscriptions. Vol. 34, pag. 90. 
(13) Il Portafoglio Maltese Nri. 81 e 82.
(14) It measures no more than 62 degrees, or rather between 60 and 61.
(15) Hist. de l'Acad. des Inscriptions. Vol. 36, p. 81.







Other Constructions.


The water tank in the district of Medeuiet is certainly an interesting monument: yes because of its proximity to the temple of Melcarte, so it seems to have been of some necessity in the religious ritual of those people; yes again due to its very structure.
It is parallelepiped in shape, with a square base of 33 feet on each side, and visibly 13 feet high. I say visibly, since it is so cluttered with stones that without much trouble and expense in cleaning it up, one could not ascertain its height.
It is divided by twelve sturdy pillars, isolated, without capitals of any kind, and arranged in three rows. Only two boulders 8 feet 8 inches thick form some of the said pillars: three all the others. No tenacious matter or lime binds these boulders, but the surfaces that touch each other are smoothed out so that there is not one that hangs on one side, and the joints run very straight. Some pieces of bitumen are still so adherent to the walls that it is with great difficulty that any fragments can be removed. Five large stones stretch out on each of the rows, and form an imposing architrave. Enormous slabs of considerable thickness rest on one side of these architraves, and the other inside the opposite wall, and present a flat ceiling, the only one known to be practicable among the Phoenicians and Egyptians.
The structure of the Serbatojo, and the huge stones, have made it called "Ghar-el-giganti" (giants' cave), and "Giganteja" (giants' district), also called the esplanade that is superimposed on it, due to the large boulders other polygons , other squares &c. that are observed there. And in those surroundings, those who took care of the temple must have certainly lived either in caves now closed, or in buildings now ruined, and who were anxious to have such a large quantity of water, perhaps for its service.
I will mention here the Wall Piece of Mesrahh Ghonok in Hhal-Dmiehh in the vicinity of the Musta, designed and illustrated by Mr. Grognet, a very talented architect and ingenious archaeologist: who, immovable from his pre-established plan, wants it to be Atlantic, and the work of giants. For me I go further down, and I am happy to have it for the construction of men of ordinary dimensions, precisely those who knew and were able to raise and superimpose the immense stones of Hhagiar Kim and the Mnaidra one on top of the other.
Speaking of Phoenician walls, I will not prejudge the one erected in no time (1) in the delightful villa of Lord Hamilton Chichester in the Pietà: and it was perhaps erected not so much to serve as a base for a magnificent avenue and a verdant parterre, but rather to shelter eye, and almost in one point, the slender forms of Greek architecture, and the heavy, but not perishable, of Phoenician. Having seen this wall one cannot help but remember the temple of Mnaidra.



(1) The year 1834, by the very honorable Mr. Frere.





Hypogea.

The Phoenicians were no less compassionate towards the Gods towards their dead. Not used to burning or burying corpses, they took care to place them in cells cut into the stone, arranged inside purposely dug caves, and outside the city (1). Their country abounds in such burial grounds; and three hours away from Sidon is the famous perforated fortress.
Among the many hypogea that have been excavated in Malta, that of Ben-Gemma (son of the scalp) deserves to be included first.
Ben-Gemma mountain stands in a delightful part of the island, an hour's walk west of the Medina. The valleys it dominates are proud of lush orange groves and pomegranate trees: and the abundant waters that flow there make the local inhabitants greengrocers. The top of the mountain, cut horizontally, offers a vast clearing from which you can enjoy one of the most beautiful towns on the island. The side facing the binnacle of Our Lady of the Letter is irregularly pierced with caves, which amount to better than sixty: and most of them are easy to access, and of a finiteness and perfection in concept and execution that surpasses all expectations.
The internal structure varies in many: some simpler, others being more subdivided. But in general a large antechamber extends into a narrow corridor, flanked by aedicules to contain a corpse, other bisomes, other trisomes; chiseled in the manner of funeral beds, at the opposite ends of which two projections are seen, one to rest the head in a hollow, the other the feet. The same shapes are kept in beds for children and adolescents.
All the aedicules, as it appears, were well closed by a slab, which fit into a hollow made on purpose around each opening of them.
Semi-circular chambers can be observed in this beautiful necropolis, repeated in various caves, which lead one to believe that they were intended for some religious ceremony.
There were those who judged (2) that these caves served as a dwelling for the Essenes, a famous sect among the Jews, which arose around the time of Our Lord, who kept themselves far from populous cities, inhabiting villages, and who were occupied with agriculture, and of innocent professions (3). And this judgment was perhaps brought about because these caves were and still are called by those good villagers "Ghirien-el-Lhud" (caves of the Jews). But it should be remembered that among our farmers for Lhud there are all non-believers, and those whose belief is unknown. Thus they called and still call "Torri-ta-Lhud” (tower of the Jews) the temple of Melcarte in Bir-Zebbugia, because it was raised to a false God by non-believers.
How much the caves of Ben-Gemma are worth of housing, especially the internal cavities, is indicated by their structure. At most, they could have served as a temporary shelter in times of persecution; as were our catacombs, of which Milizia (4) says that "made first for the dead, they served to save the living with what was most precious to them."
Passing in silence the well-known and numerous hypogea of ​​Melleha and Benghisa, it is worth mentioning what has so far remained silent in the district called "tal Ghzira." It is no further than 200 steps from the bridge that connects Fort Manoel to the mainland, and a stone's throw from the new villa of the cavalier Giacomo Tagliaferro. You enter through a small door, which appears to be Greek, about 3 feet high, and which was certainly closed by a plaque, and perhaps concealed. After descending a step, you find yourself in a short corridor which on the left widens into a small semi-circular bedroom, in the wall of which a dead cell is hollowed out: to the right of the corridor, and in front of the bedroom you can see two rooms of unequal size. The major one, which will certainly have preserved the corpse of the nobleman, is decorated all around with roof tiles, a form of ornamental sculpture widely adopted by the Phoenicians.
I will not remain silent about the other burial ground of Ghar-gherduf on the island of Gozo, in the district of San Giorgio at a distance of about a mile and a half from Rabbato. It is now, vandalically and worse, reduced to a millstone: so that very few of the bedrooms and storage rooms remained: and before long these too will disappear due to the repeated blows of the excavator.
I will end by saying that if one wanted to work on tracing Phoenician hypogea, Roman catacombs, and Christian dormitories and crypts, there would be material to write a very interesting "Underground Malta:" and for this purpose it would be inevitable that no capable person would be found, the who wanted to equate the glory of the Maltese Bosio.


(1) Hist. de l'Acad. des Inscript. Vol. 42, pag. 55, 87.
(2) Ciantar. Vol. 1, pag. 240.
(3) Bergier, Diction. Encyclop. de theologie.
(4) Dictionary, to the word Catacombs.







Monuments of Sculpture and Plastic.

1. Among the remaining monuments of Phoenician sculpture, the Cabiric statuettes already spoken of occupy the first place without fail. Next to them come the two Cippi, or, we will say with the others, Candelabra, of salt marble, 3 feet 2 inches tall, including the pedestal, and broken at the top.
There is no one who can ascertain when they were found: but Ciantar really made a mistake in saying that they had been unearthed in 1732, since Can had already spoken about them in detail. Costanzo in December 1694 in a letter to the Bulifon, reported in the fourth collection of the "Memorable Letters" of 1697.
They are votive and, according to the Greek legend engraved on the pedestal, they were offered to Hercules the leader by Dionysius and Serapion, sons of Serapion of Tyre.
But the value of these two candlesticks does not lie so much in the work of the chisel, although of quick shapes and gentle execution, but in the inscription that can be read on the pedestal, together with the Greek one, and which enjoys the pride of being the masterpiece, up to now known, of the Phoenician epigraphy: to interpret which Barthelemy, Swinton, Perez Bayer, Fabricius, and the very erudite Gesenius sweated and trained.
In the Phoenician inscription the two brothers are called Abdasar and Asherchemor, sons of Asherchemor of Tyre: but this diversity of names in the two different languages ​​is not surprising; knowing how the Orientals, especially after the Alexandrian conquests, had taken to appropriating a Greek name in addition to the Oriental which they still retained (1). Hercules is usually called Melkart, Lord, or King of the earth.
Grand Master Rohan (would you believe?) discarded these memorial stones, sending one as a present to the King of France in 1780, which Monsignor Brest saw in 1797 in the Library of the Mazarin College. Thus, thanks to the generosity of the most provident prince, only one remained, which is preserved in the museum of this Library.
2. A figurine pasta mask, smaller than life, but very well modeled and with an interesting shape. Perhaps those who believe it depicts Esmun, with his long beard and adorned with the usual headbands in the guise of a graceful necklace, are not far from the truth.
3. A small figurine vase unearthed in 1767. It is undoubtedly an Epichysin of beautiful shapes, excellent workmanship, and very well preserved. The holes that surround the edges suggest they served some religious use. Castelli (2) published a Phoenician legend in the copperplate he published, inscribed on the maximum swelling of the vase; which however I have never been able to track down.
4. A terra cotta bath found by chance near the Medina in 1797. It is worked in raised bands on a flat background, all very well polished, and of a light reddish colour. It is no more than 5½ feet long over a height of 2 feet 7 inches, and measures one foot four inches wide. Three slabs of the same material serve as a lid. The bottom, or lower surface, is worthy of observation, as it has a conical-shaped hollow in each of the internal corners, ending within the depth of the corresponding foot. Assuming that this bath was to be used for extreme ablutions, it is easy to infer that these recesses or containers could have been made on purpose, in order to place natrone and aromatic herbs in solution with water.
To those who want a sarcophagus to be preferred, not finding it large enough to have it as a bathroom, I will say in brief words; that the same difficulty lies on his side. Since if 5 1/2 feet long &c. they are not enough for a bath, they are certainly not enough for a sarcophagus.
It is not to say that the edges are dotted with very thick holes, and that these small practicable holes could only have been a very simple symbolic ornament.
5. If you really want to know how much the Phoenicians were involved in the art of glassmaking, look at the beautiful Amphora which is preserved in this museum. It was found in the ditch of the Sant' Angelo castle, near the place where the temple to Juno stood, rich in gifts and votes, which so powerfully tempted the good wool of Verres. It measures a foot and a half in height, and the maximum swelling is two feet and an inch. It is still in excellent condition, except for one of the handles which is broken in some part: and the luster and color of the silver patina that many centuries have given it almost makes you doubt whether it is not truly an elegant silver vase, released just from the hands of the craftsman.


(1) Fabricy de l'Alfabeto de los Fenices. pag. 175. 
(2) Siciliæ Veteres Inscriptiones, pag. 298.







Phoenician Monetary.


Of the Phoenician-Maltese coins only five survived, in bronze, with the well-known legend of three letters in four of them, the fifth being anepigraph.
1. Veiled female head with diadem. Reverse - A deity ending in herms, courted by two priestesses. The one preserved in the Library museum is recusa, and has a small senile head, bearded, and also veiled. 
2. Veiled female head with diadem. A: Ram's Head.
3. The same female leader. A: A Tripod,
with three crowns.
4. Head of a bearded man, looking at a caduceus. A: An object resembling a pomegranate within a laurel wreath, which fruit many believed to be a bell. I am of the opinion that the head of man represents Esmun (Aesculapius) looking at two serpents. And this reptile always goes in the company of the God who restores health.
5. Veiled female head with diadem. A: A crab. This coin is devoid of legend at all.
Monsignor Brest spoke at length about these five coins: and whoever has the desire to be better educated about them should read what the learned prelate wrote about them.




EGYPTIAN PERIOD.

The coming of the Phoenicians is attested by history which is silent about that of the Egyptians. So two questions could arise: If the Egyptians really came to Malta, and when.
I will respond to the first by describing monuments recognized as Egyptian by Münter, Della Marmora, Orioli, Lepsius, and by many of those who know, who judged them after having seen and examined them. Such monuments were all found at random, at various times, and in different places in the Malta Group: and among them there are immovable ones, and non-transportable ones, except with certainty of breaking. And if monumental proofs are the surest for establishing a historical truth; I couldn't find any more suitable ones to help decide on the arrival of the Egyptians in the Maltese Group.
It remains to be seen when they probably arrived to settle there. First, they may have come together with the Phoenician colony, as Vossius opines to have happened in Spain. Fortasse classis ea quæ in Hispanias coloniam duxit, non modo Phonicibus, sed etiam Ægyptiis constabat (Perhaps the fleet which led the colony to Spain consisted not only of the Phoenicians, but also of the Egyptians) (1): and that in the course of time there occurred a fusion of the Egyptian customs and uses, in those of the Phoenicians, who due to their number and relations had exclusively acquired the domination of these islands, and even obliterated the name of the Egyptians. Secondly, they could have come, dominated by Psammetichus, who, greedy for riches, opened the ports of his kingdom to all foreign peoples, stimulating his subjects to traffic and trade.
The Egyptians were not new to the art of trading; since according to what Huezio (2) says they always enjoyed the fame of having found in the world the traffic in person of Osiris and Mercury. So they willingly seconded the impulse given to them by the sovereign.
Furthermore, they were very expert helmsmen. Euripides (in Troas) assures us that the Greeks naively confess that they learned the art of navigation from them.
Where better could good traffickers and excellent sailors go and establish commercial establishments than in Malta?
This could have happened 650 years before the coming of Our Lord: when the Greeks mastered the island, and they could draw many advantages from the coming of the Egyptians.
I will not dwell too much on this matter, and I will let everyone choose the opinion that suits him best, and which he believes to be the most probable, or least uncertain.

(1) De Origine et progressu Idolatriæ, libro 1, cap. 34. 
(2) Hist. du commerce des Anciens.





Architecture monument.


Of great interest is the Underground dug into a solid rock, and discovered in 1847 by Messrs. Winthrop, Consul of the United States of America, and W. F. Lock of the Royal Engineers.
It is 3 quarters of a mile S.E. from the Medina, in the district of Kasam-el-geuieni. Three rooms make it up, communicating with each other through passages dug within the intervening walls. The one on the left, looking from the outside, is the largest, and is 35 feet long and 15 wide: the other two do not run more than 18 feet wide and varies from 15 to 16 feet. Each of the three bedrooms has a communication opening to the outside. The roof is parallel to the ground: all the lines generally run straight, or break to form angles: and all the shapes are squat and pygmy.
Note some seats, protruding from the wall, and a square pool, 10 feet on each side, two feet deep, dug on purpose to contain water, of which there is never a shortage, and supplied perhaps by some friendly spring nearby.
This excavation is under the edge of the hill, in a steep and difficult place to access. The most practicable entrance is that of the room on the left: the other two are almost impervious, and are hidden behind some large stones.
The internal space thus diminished and cluttered by those large intervening walls; the difficulty of getting there; the care to hide the entrances from others, arranged themselves in such a way as to make surprise difficult, but when surprised facilitate escape; the seats that we would better call beds protruding from the walls; and finally the great concern to be provided with water; are some of the many reasons that make me consider the excavation of Kasam-el-geuieni as a "place of refuge."
The Reverend Margoliuth, induced to visit it by the references that were published in the London Literary Gazette of 2 October 1847, explored it, examined it, spoke about it at length, and finally drew the conclusion that it was a "place of worship" of the primitive inhabitants of the island probably Egyptians or Phoenicians.
But if the learned gentleman had paid attention to the pre-established forms of Phoenician religious architecture, which abhors rectilinearity and the severity of rectangles in the general assembly: he would have found no room for doubt in which to decide between these and the Egyptians.
The Phoenicians also built and not excavated temples to their gods. The fortresses of Phoenicia, and the hill of Ben-Gemma are full of their hypogea: but their Hypetrian temples rose towering in Tyre, in Gadez, in Malta and in the sister island.






Monuments of Sculpture and Plastic.

The group representing the Egyptian Triad brought by a Thalamifera was found by chance in Gozo, in a solitary place, in the midst of rubble, which had been collected there since time immemorial. It is wrought of home-grown stone and rises one foot two inches above a pedestal one-half inch high.
Osiris sits, as if on a chair, in human limbs, with the head of Ibi, and having the mysterious Tau breathed in his left hand. He has a narrow recess on his head, where the usual miter could safely be fitted. Sitting next to him is Isis in feminine guise, wearing a bonnet, the two edges of which cover her breasts on both sides. She is dressed in a tight wrap that goes down to her heels; and the small hollow on the top of the head indicates that he once did not lack the lotus flower among his ordinary attire. Oro, the little boy, is in the middle, with the large disc on his falcon head.
The thalamifera that supports the chair stands upright, covered from the waist down with a light skirt, and adorned with curly hair on the head, not dissimilar to that of the Egyptian female, which Montfaucon published in Copper 140, No. 9.
The sides of the pedestal, those of the strip that underlies the chair, and the dais are also rich in hieroglyphics: as is a ribbon-like stripe, which starts from the back of the priestess's neck, and gets lost in the pedestal: on the humerals themselves mysterious figures are engraved of her.
Dr Lepsius saw and observed with great interest this, which he judged to be a sepulchral monument: he took the imprint of its hieroglyphics, and promised an interpretation of it. The authority of such a judge will silence those who, not knowing its value, or envying its possession, cried out that it was false.

COOKED TERRA SARCOPHAGUS. - Abela already spoke of three terra cotta sarcophagi, which he kept preserved in his museum (1). He gave the drawing of one, and he says it was found in 1621 in the district of Ghar-Barca, a place not far from the Medina. The other two were similar to that one: but none of the three reached us.
The sarcophagus of which I am speaking resembles only in general form the ones mentioned by our historiographer, and was also found in the district of Ghar-Barca in 1797. You are right to believe that the Egyptians had their necropolis in this part of the island principal.
This beautiful remnant of antiquity is 4 feet 11 inches long, and decreases in width from one foot 11 inches to 9 1/2 inches. The largest periphery taken across the chest, which is prominent, to indicate the sex, is 5 feet, the smallest 3. The upper part serves as a lid for the entire length. The youthful face is modeled with great skill in plastic art, with flat eyes, not deeply sunken, as in Greek statues, and the eyebrows indicated only by a light and subtle prominence. The toes are also beautiful, delicately protruding from the bundle that appears to envelop the body.
Of the damsel's corpse, locked there, only a little dust was found, to which it had returned, and a simple iron ring which perhaps had been placed on her finger as a sign of affection by someone who was dear to her (2).
It is known that the Egyptians prized this metal: and the iron rings found in Egyptian tombs prove that they used to put it on the fingers of the dead (3).
To those who demand hieroglyphics on our sarcophagi to canonize them without doubt as Egyptians, I will say that this would be the same as wanting the name of the person inscribed under the portrait in order to recognize them. Furthermore, on the two white granite sarcophagi found in the two great pyramids of Gizech, and on the ablution basin of Cheops there is no hieroglyph of any kind. And they leave without the two lions at the entrance to the Capitoline Hill, the Osiris of the Barberini palace, the obelisk that rises in front of Santa Maria Maggiore, and the other in front of San Pietro. Yet it never occurred to anyone that such monuments are not truly Egyptian.
It remains to be seen why no embalmed body has ever been found in so many mortuary coffins.
The embalming process required many elements, which the nature of the Maltese soil and the civil condition of the Egyptians residing here could not offer. The three classes of people employed to carry out this funereal rite belonged to the privileged caste of priests and doctors, who were sufficiently rich and comfortable in Egypt, had a fixed seat there, and never followed the colonizers, whose condition was certainly not to be compared to that of the colonizers of our times. They therefore lacked the scribe whose duty it was to mark the length of the incision to be made on the corpse: they lacked the paraschite, who, having made the cut, immediately began to flee to avoid the stones of the people present: they lacked someone to remove every viscera except the heart and the kidneys: finally, the pourer of cedar oil, myrrh, cassia, cinnamon and other fragrant substances was missing.
Without many ministers, who were required by law to practice this particular art; devoid of such a variety and diversity of grocery stores not found on the island; those ancient inhabitants were content to place the corpses of perhaps the most notable among them in sarcophagi, which at least had the appearance of their mummy coffins; eager to perpetuate their national customs in any way, compatibly with the means that the hospitable island offered them.
And here it is appropriate to recall how Malta has never enjoyed the addition of forest and that consequently it could not offer large trunks, suitable for being hollowed out to contain corpses. Furthermore, the alabaster quarry in Gozo was only discovered during the teaching of Despuig, and that of San Giuliano in Malta only in 1768: there is not even a word to be said about some small block of marble found by chance: it therefore remained to choose between the common stone, and clay figulina. And the Egyptians with great wisdom chose the latter in preference, both because it was more long-lasting and also because it was more suited to the plastic art, which they had carried so far.

Among the bronze monuments, a seated ISIS can be seen, broken in the lower part from the femur downwards, and without the arms that she once had and which perhaps supported the nursing Gold. She carries on her head a kind of basket, even if we don't want to say a tower, which would qualify her for the turreted Isis depicting Cybele.

A silent HARPOCRATES who bends to sit. It is very similar to that of the knight Fontaine, reported by Montfaucon volume 2, copper 123, No. 4. Ours also carries on his head that immense encumbrance of amphorae and glasses: but the horn that descends on his right humerus is not the base of that machine, but rather the symbolic Horn of Plenty.

Varj OSIRIDS among which one having two rings to hang it transversely. It is not out of place that the eminently superstitious Egyptians chose this divinity from their Pantheon to protect travellers, and that they consequently hung his effigy around their necks.

Some STATUETTES of cooked earth, covered with greenish paint, and decorated with hieroglyphics, which were used to be buried with the corpses. They all resemble each other, except for one which is much smaller than the others, and whose paint and signs have been eroded by the harsh teeth of time or the condition of the place. There has been an abundance of such Mani at various times and in various places on the island. And there are those who own no small number.

I will not ignore the famous gold PLATE, found in a case of the same metal, near the Medina in 1694. The hieroglyphics with which it was covered could well be assimilated to those of the Isiac Tablet. This Egyptian plaque was spoken of in the fourth Collection of Memorable Letters, in the Proceedings of the Leipzig Scholars, and by Montfaucon, as a monument of the highest importance. Well: Can. Costanzo, who had received it from someone who did not know its value, took the liberty of making a present of it to Cardinal Cantelmi, previously inquisitor in Malta, and then archbishop in Naples: and to perhaps dissolve some debt of friendship, he certainly deprived the home of an object, which could form the main decoration of every museum.

If the bad example of the canon and of the grand master (4) had not unfortunately been followed so often now in one way and now in another: we too could have boasted of the number of monuments of national antiquity, which either due to the excellence of the work, or due to the rarity they now adorn either private collections, or foreign galleries: nor would we find ourselves forced to repeat this often while blushing; we have little, much was stolen from us.



(1) Agius speaks of another, of the same material and form, which was found in Gozo near the church of San Francesco.
(2) Even now an iron ring is sent to the bride, and without the jewel. Plinius, 1. 33, c. 1.
(3) Wilkinson's Manners and Customs of ancient Egyptians, vol. 3, pag. 242.
(4) Pag. 39.






